
Skip to main content
Full text of "THE ZOHAR"
See other formats

The Zohar 



LAITMAN 

KABBALAH PUBLISHERS 


Rav Michael Laitman, PhD 




THE ZOHAR 

Copyright © 2007 by MICHAEL LAITMAN 
All rights reserved 

Published by Laitman Kabbalah Publishers 
www.kabbalah.info info@kabbalah.info 

1057 Steeles Avenue West, Suite 532, Toronto, ON, M2R 3X1, Canada 
194 Quentin Rd, 2nd floor, Brooklyn, New York, 11223, USA 

Printed in Israel 

No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner without written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in 
critical articles or reviews. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Laitman, Michael. 

The Zohar: annotations to the Ashlag commentary / Michael Laitman. ~ 
1st ed. 
p. cm. 

ISBN 978-1-897448-09-0 

1. Ashlag, Yehudah. Perush ha-sulam. 2. Zohar. 3. Cabala. I. Title. 

BM525.A59A7755 2009 

296.1>62~dc22 

2008015080 


Translation: David Brushin, Keren Applebaum 

Copy Editors: Michael R. Kellogg, Mark Berelekhis 

Editorial Assistance: Leah Goldberg 

Proofreading: Lily Solopov, Natasha Sigmund, Sarah Talal 

Layout: LubaVisotzki 

Diagrams: Baruch Khovov, Luba Visotzki 

Cover Design: Bat Sheva Brosh 

Printing: Doron Goldin 

Post Production: Uri Laitman 

Executive Editor: Chaim Ratz 


FIRST EDITION: FEBRUARY 2009 
First printing 



Table of Contents 


About Rabbi Shimon BarYochai. 

Studying with Rabbi Akiva. 

The Cave at Peqi’in. 

The Idra Raba (Great Assembly) and The Book of Zohar. 

The Reincarnation of a Unique Soul. 

Rashbi’s Departure. 

About The Book of Zohar. 

Removing the Covers. 

Accelerating the Spread of the Wisdom. 

Introduction. 

List of Abbreviations and Explanations. 

Original Names and Their Equivalents Accepted 

in the English Translation. 

Original Titles and Their Equivalents Accepted 

in the English Translation. 

An Example of the Original Text of The Zohar. 

Literal Translation of the Aforecited Text from Aramaic into English.. 

The Rose. 

The Goal of Creation. 

The Inverse Proportion Between the Vessel and the Light. 

The State of Katnut (Smallness). 

The State of Gadlut (Greatness/adulthood). 

Ascent of the Lower One to the Upper One. 

The Light of ZON Is The Light of the Worlds BYA. 

Correction in Three Lines. 

Flower Buds. 

Who Created These. 

Who Created These (by Eliyahu). 

The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter. 


....7 

....7 

....8 

....8 

....9 

..10 

..10 

..11 

..12 

..13 

..15 

..21 

..27 

..28 

..29 

..36 

..41 

..45 

..46 

..48 

..48 

..50 

..51 

..54 

..54 

..55 

..56 

..63 

..73 

..91 

101 













The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba.117 

The Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet.131 

Punctuation Marks in the Hebrew Alphabet (Nekudot).134 

The Letter Tav.143 

The Letter Shin.148 

The Letters Kuf and Reish.153 

The Letter Tzadik.154 

The Letter Peh.156 

The Letter Ayin.158 

The Letter Samech.159 

The Letter Nun.161 

The Letters Mem and Lamed.163 

The Letter Chaf.164 

The Letter Yod.166 

The Letter Tet.168 

The Letter Zayin.17 2 

The Letters Vav and Hey.173 

The Letters Dalet and Gimel.173 

The Letter Bet.174 

The Letter Aleph.175 

Supernal Wisdom.179 

The Lock and the Key.181 

Avraham.189 

The Vision of Rabbi Chiya.193 

Who Is Your Partner?.209 

The Donkey Driver.223 

The Two Points.271 

The Night of the Bride.281 

Heaven and Earth.315 

Among All the Sages of the Nations of the World, 

There Are None Like You.337 

Who Is This?.347 

He Who Rejoices on Holidays.355 

The Torah and Prayer.365 

Rabbi Shimon’s Departure from the Cave.375 

The First Commandment.379 

























The Second Commandment.385 

The Third Commandment.393 

The Fourth Commandment.399 

The Fifth Commandment.405 

The Sixth Commandment.411 

The Seventh Commandment.415 

The Eighth Commandment.421 

The Ninth Commandment.427 

The Tenth Commandment.433 

The Eleventh Commandment.445 

The Twelfth Commandment.449 

The Thirteenth Commandment.451 

The Fourteenth Commandment.453 

The Intention in the Prayer.465 

Raising a Prayer.473 

Appendix One. Further Reading.507 

Appendix Two. About Bnei Baruch.515 

How to Contact Bnei Baruch.519 






























Prologue 


ABOUT RABBI SHIMON BAR-YOCHAI 1 

In the second century CE, a single man 
was granted the spiritual knowledge that 
Kabbalists had accumulated for 3,000 
years before his time. Rabbi Shimon 
Bar-Yochai (Rashbi) put it all on paper 
and then hid it, as humanity was not 
ready for it. Today, we are ready for the 
revelation of The Book of Zohar. 

Rabbi Shimon Bar-Yochai (Rashbi), 
author of The Book of Zohar (The Book of 
Radiance ) was a Tana—a great sage in the early Common Era centuries. Rashbi’s 
name is tied to numerous legends, and he is mentioned constantly in the Talmud 
and in the Midrash, the sacred Hebrew texts of his time. He lived in Sidon and 
in Meron, and established a seminary in the Western Galilee. 

Rashbi was born and raised in the Galilee (a mountainous region in 
today’s Northern Israel). Even as a child, he was not like other children his age. 
Questions such as, “What is the purpose of my life?” “Who am I?” and “How is 
the world built?” plagued him and demanded answers. 

In those days, life in Galilee was very harsh: the Romans persecuted Jews 
and continually invented new laws to make their lives more difficult. Among 
these laws was a decree that prohibited Jews from studying the Torah (then 
synonymous with Kabbalah). 

1 The articles, “About Rabbi Shimon Bar-3ochai” and “About The Book of Zohar” are presented 

here courtesy of the paper Kabbalah Today. 


tm 

A7TA.1 


• 7ir 7d \\yyv '21 ■ 


n pup wu- 

m 

•rniir'iiopy'p mi- 

m 

•piUOl ' Wjk’MkOI V 

Hr 

•Air:))-AT)!' 




7 




8 


The Zohar 


However, despite the Romans’ prohibition, Rashbi immersed himself in the 
Kabbalah and tried to understand its subtle teachings. He felt that beneath the 
Biblical stories was a profound and hidden truth, which held the answers to his 
persistent questions. 

Gradually, Rabbi Shimon came to realize that he had to find a teacher 
who had already been through the spiritual path, gained experience, and could 
guide others up the spiritual ladder. He decided to join the group of the greatest 
Kabbalist of the time—Rabbi Akiva—a decision that turned out to be the turning 
point in Rashbi’s life. 

STUDYING WITH RABBI AKIVA 

Rabbi Shimon was an avid, devoted student, burning with desire to discover 
the Higher realms of reality. Before long, he was one of Rabbi Akiva’s prime 
students. He studied with Rabbi Akiva for thirteen years, and achieved the 
highest levels on the spiritual ladder. 

The Bar-Kokheva revolt abruptly ended the great days of Rabbi Akiva’s 
seminary. Almost all of his 24,000 students died in plagues, and in fierce battles 
against the Romans. Of the 24,000 students, only five survived, and Rashbi was 
among them. 

Rashbi was among the leaders of the Bar-Kokheva revolt against the Roman 
rule in the land of Israel. His resistance became even more fierce and unyielding 
when he’d learned how his teacher, Rabbi Akiva, had been ruthlessly executed. 

The Talmud writes that once, when Rashbi spoke against the Roman rule, 
a fellow Jew heard him and alerted the Roman authorities. In consequence, 
Rashbi was tried in absentia and was sentenced to death. The Roman emperor 
sent men in search of him, but to their disappointment, Rashbi seemed to have 
vanished into thin air. 

THE CAVE AT PEQI’IN 

Legends have it that Rashbi and his son fled to the Galilee, hid in a cave at 
Peqi’in, a village in the north of Israel, and remained there for thirteen years. 
During that time, they delved in the secrets of the wisdom of the hidden. Their 
efforts succeeded, and they discovered the entire system of creation. 

After thirteen years in a cave, Rashbi heard that the Roman emperor had 
died. He could finally heave a sigh of relief. After leaving the cave, Rashbi 
gathered nine students and went with them to a small cave in Meron, known as 



Prologue 


9 


The Idra Raba (Great Assembly). With their help, he wrote The Book of Zohar, 
the most important book of Kabbalah. 

Baal HaSulam described Rashbi and his students as the only beings who 
achieved perfection, the 125 spiritual degrees that complete the correction 
of one’s soul. When he finished his commentary on The Book of Zohar, Baal 
HaSulam held a festive meal to celebrate its completion. At that celebration, he 
stated that “...prior to the days of the Messiah, it is impossible to be awarded all 
125 degrees... except the Rashbi and his contemporaries, meaning the authors 
of The Book of Zohar. They were awarded all 125 degrees in completeness, even 
though they lived prior to the days of the Messiah. Hence, we often find in 
The Zohar that there will not be a generation such as the Rashbi’s until the 
generation of the Messiah King. This is why his composition made such a strong 
impression in the world, since the secrets of the Torah in it occupy the level of 
all 125 degrees. This is also why it is said in The Zohar that The Book of Zohar will 
not be revealed except at the end of days, meaning in the days of the Messiah.” 

THE IDRA RABA (GREAT ASSEMBLY) AND THE BOOK OF ZOHAR 

Idra Raba is a cave located in the north of Israel, between Meron and Zephath. 
Rashbi took his students to this cave, and there he wrote The Book of Zohar. It is 
almost impossible to understand how great Rabbi Shimon Bar-Yochai really was. 
He belongs, as Baal HaSulam puts it, to the highest Inner Light. This is why he 
had to use Rabbi Abba to put his words into writing. In The Book of Zohar, the 
Rashbi tells his students: “I am arranging you as follows: Rabbi Abba will write, 
Rabbi Elazar, my son, will study orally, and the rest of the friends will converse 
in their hearts” (Zohar, Haazinu). 

The Book of Zohar was written in the second century CE, not long after the 
ruin of the Second Temple and the beginning of the last exile of the people 
of Israel from its land. But even prior to the exile, Rashbi predicted that The 
Book of Zohar would only be revealed at the end of the exile. He stated that its 
appearance to the masses would symbolize the end of the spiritual exile: “...in it, 
they will come out of the exile with mercy” (Zohar, Naso). 

It is also written in The Book of Zohar that its wisdom would be revealed 
to all toward the end of the six thousand years, the period allotted to the 
correction of humanity: “And when it is near the days of the Messiah, even 
infants in the world are destined to find the secrets of the wisdom, and know 
in them the ends and the calculations of redemption, and at that time it will 
be revealed to all” (Zohar, VaYera). 



10 


The Zohar 


THE REINCARNATION OF A UNIQUE SOUL 

Rashbi is an incarnation of a unique soul, which coordinates and connects 
the Upper Force to every creation. This soul comes down into our world and 
incarnates in the patriarchs of Kabbalah. This is the order of its appearance: 
Abraham, Moses, Rabbi Shimon BarYochai, the ARI (Rabbi Isaac Luria), and 
Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag (Baal HaSulam). Each incarnation of this soul promotes 
humanity to a new spiritual degree and leaves its mark in Kabbalah books, which 
serve the generations that follow. 

An example of this process can be found in special sections of The Zohar 
called Raia Meheimna (The Loyal Shepherd). In these parts, Rashbi speaks from 
a state of clothing in Moses’ soul. Another example of this is the book, Shaar 
HaGilgulim (Gate of Reincarnations), where Rashbi speaks from a state of clothing 
in the soul of the ARI. 

The Book of Zohar is undoubtedly unique and one of the world’s most 
renowned compositions. Since its writing, thousands of stories have been 
linked to The Zohar, and the book is still shrouded in mystery today. The 
fascination around it is so great that even though the book is completely 
incomprehensible to our generation without proper interpretation, millions 
of people diligently read it. 

RASHBI’S DEPARTURE 

According to tradition, Rabbi Shimon BarYochai passed away in the presence 
of his friends on Lag BaOmer (the 33 rd day of the Omer count, which starts on 
the first day of Passover) of the year 160 CE, and was buried in Meron. With his 
death, the soul of a giant Kabbalist completed its task in our world. 

Rashbi fulfilled his destination. Hundreds of thousands visit his gravesite 
yearly, trying to sense some of the Light that he had brought to the world. The 
greatest Kabbalists praise his composition and repeatedly claim that The Book of 
Zohar is destined to bring redemption to the world. 

Rav Kook, the first Chief Rabbi of Israel, writes about the Zohar (Ohr 
Yakar): “This composition, called The Book of Zohar, is like Noah’s Ark, where 
there were many kinds, but those kinds and families could not exist unless 
by entering the ark. ...Thus the righteous will enter the secret of the Light 
of this composition to persist, and thus is the virtue of the composition, 
that immediately when engaging, with his desire for the love of God, it 
will draw him as a magnet draws the iron. And he will enter it to save his 



Prologue 


11 


soul and spirit and his correction. And even if he is wicked, there is no fear 
should he enter.” 

We are living in a historic time. The soul of Rashbi is completing its mission 
in our generation, and thanks to this spiritual giant, who lived nearly 2,000 
years ago, the wisdom of Kabbalah is emerging so we may all ascend to a life of 
eternity and wholeness. 


ABOUT THE BOOK OF ZOHAR 

The Book of Zohar is the most mysterious, and at the same time the most 
significant book of Kabbalah. In recent years, it has become increasingly clear 
that although The Book of Zohar was written eighteen centuries ago, it was 
actually written for our time. Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag (Baal HaSulam) opened it 
to us and rekindled what has long been forgotten from our hearts. 

The depth of the wisdom in The Book of Zohar is locked behind a thousand doors. 

-Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag (Baal HaSulam), “Preface to the Book of Zohar” 

Since the dawn of humanity, unique individuals climbed the spiritual ladder 
and achieved the highest level of bonding with the Upper Force, the Creator. 
We call those people “Kabbalists.” 

Through this bonding, they came to understand that the whole of reality, 
from the highest spiritual worlds down to our world, is founded on love and 
bestowal. They realized that there is nothing in the world except for this Force, 
and that everything that happens in reality was made only to bring humanity to 
permanent existence with this sensation. 

Kabbalists have searched and found the answers to every question they 
asked—the purpose of our lives, the structure of the world, and how we can 
determine our destiny. They wrote about what they discovered in books such as 
Raziel Hamalaach (The Angel Raziel), Sefer Yetzira (The Book of Creation), Etz Chaim 
(The Tree of Life), and others. 

Of all the books, the most seminal, mysterious, and profound is The Book 
of Zohar (The Book of Radiance). The Book of Zohar describes the hidden system 
of the Upper Guidance. It depicts the worlds, the great powers that govern 
them, and how one who chooses to study Kabbalah affects his or her own fate 
and that of humanity. 



12 


The Zohar 


The Zohar also explains how every event cascades from the Upper World to 
ours, and the dressings it acquires here. But what makes The Zohar unique is the 
fact that it was not written for its contemporaries; it was rather intended for a 
generation that would live two millennia later—our generation. 

REMOVING THE COVERS 

Our generation stands at the very threshold of redemption, if we only know how to spread 
the wisdom of the hidden in the masses. 

-Baal HaSulam, “Messiah’s Horn” 

The twentieth century has brought unprecedented changes. These opened the 
door to a whole new phase, which the greatest Kabbalists have been describing 
for centuries in their writings. The greatest change of all is that in this century, 
Kabbalists state that studying Kabbalah is not only permitted, it is a must! 

It is written in The Book of Zohar itself that the wisdom of Kabbalah would 
begin its spreading from the year 1840. The great 18 th century Kabbalist, The 
Vilna Gaon (GRA), wrote in his book Kol HaTor (Voice of the Turtledove) that the 
process of the revelation of the Kabbalah would begin in 1990. In his book, Even 
Shlemah (A Perfect and Just Weight), Chapter 11, he even stated that redemption 
depends primarily on the study of Kabbalah. 

Rav Kook explained that “the great spiritual questions that were once 
resolved only for the great and the excellent, must now be resolved to various 
degrees within the entire nation” ( Eder HaYaker ve Ikvey HaTzon, p. 144). 

But it was Baal HaSulam who turned the words of the Kabbalists from 
a vision to a tangible reality. He clearly saw that the time had come to allow 
everyone to study The Book of Zohar. He claimed that by studying The Zohar, the 
whole of humanity would rise and attain the spiritual world. 

With this vision in mind, Baal HaSulam devoted himself to composing a 
comprehensive, accurate, and systematic interpretation of The Book of Zohar. 
His goal was to unveil the book to the public and make it suitable for the souls 
of our generation. 

In the introduction to his commentary on The Zohar, he explained why he 
wrote it: “I have named the commentary HaSulam (The Ladder) to indicate that 
the function of my commentary is as the function of any ladder. If you have 
an attic filled with abundance, you need only a ladder to climb it, and all the 
bounty in the world will be in your hands.” 



Prologue 


13 


ACCELERATING THE SPREAD OF THE WISDOM 

All the Kabbalists dreamed of our generation, when the whole of humanity 
could discover the wondrous things they already had. They prayed that through 
reading the authentic sources they had left for us, we, too, would achieve 
bonding with the Upper Force, as did they. In his commentary on The Book of 
Zohar, Baal HaSulam threw us a rope, “a life buoy.” In doing so, he paved our 
way to a future of abundance and prosperity. 

Baal HaSulam called upon us to give greater weight to engagement in the 
wisdom of Kabbalah, and accelerate the spreading of the wisdom. He knew 
that only the wisdom of Kabbalah could elevate the world to the spiritual 
realm and into the eternity that Kabbalists had been experiencing throughout 
the generations. 

Webster’s Dictionary defines a generation as “a group of individuals born 
and living contemporaneously (at the same time).” In Kabbalah, however, a 
generation is a spiritual phase. According to great Kabbalists such as the Holy 
ARI, our generation—our spiritual phase—began in the sixteenth century. 

The longer we wait with the spiritual ascension our generation is meant to 
achieve, the greater will be our discomfort. The spiritual realm, which determines 
what happens in our world, will increase its pressure on us until we decide to 
achieve this realm for ourselves. 

In the words of the great Kabbalist Rabbi Avraham Azulai (in his 
introduction to the book, Ohr ha Chama (Light of the Sun)), “I have found it 
written that the above decree to not openly engage in the wisdom of truth was 
only for a time—until the end of the 1490. From then on ... the sentence has 
been lifted, and permission was given to engage in The Book of Zohar. And from 
the year 1540 it has become praiseworthy to engage in great numbers since it 
is by virtue of this the Messiah King will come, and not by another virtue. It is 
inappropriate to be negligent.” 

“But the wise shall understand that their elevation comes from the Creator, 
the Tree of Life. And they who are righteous shall shine like the brightness of 
the firmament” (Daniel, 12:3). 2 

“By virtue of Rabbi Shimon’s composition, The Book of Zohar, from the 
Supernal Force that brings all things back to the Creator, at the end of days, the 
children of Israel will taste from the Tree of Life, which is The Book of Zohar; and 
they will be redeemed from exile by the Creator’s mercy” (Naso, 90). 


2 To facilitate comprehension of the spiritual meaning of ancient Hebrew sources, quotes are not 
direct translations, but rather reflect the Kabbalistic meaning of the texts. 




Introduction 


The Book of Zohar narrates that Rabbi Shimon Bar-Yochai (Rashbi) and his son, 
Rabbi Aba, attained the level of Prophet Eliyahu (Elijah). Hence, it is said that 
Eliyahu himself visited their cave and taught them the Torah. (Incidentally, the 
cave in the village of Peqi’in still exists today.) 

The author of Divrey Yoel (The Words of Yoel) wrote the following in the book 
The Torah of Rashbi: “Before Rabbi Shimon studied the secrets of the Torah, 
there was a rule in the cave—to settle disputes according to the opinion of Rabbi 
Yehuda, the author of the Talmud. However, after Rabbi Shimon left the cave, 
everything that he had written in The Zohar was considered to have exceeded all 
human attainments.” Rashbi himself received the name Butzina Kadisha (Holy 
Candle), as he had attained the soul of Moshe (Moses). 

Verdicts on legislative and procedural matters are rendered in accordance 
with the Talmud or The Book of Zohar, depending on where this matter is 
examined more strictly. If the matter is mentioned neither in the Talmud nor 
in The Zohar, then the decision is based on the source that best elucidates this 
matter. If the disputed matter is between the Talmud and the legislators, the 
decision is based on the assertion from The Book of Zohar. If the legislators 
themselves cannot come to an agreement on the matter in dispute, the decision 
is based on the opinion of The Zohar (Mishna Brura, 25, 42). 

The great follower of Rashbi, an heir (next receiver) to his soul, Rabbi Isaac 
Luria (The Holy ARI) wrote that his soul was a return of the soul of Rabbi 
Shimon, and the soul of Rabbi Shimon was a return of the soul of Moshe 
(Shaar HaGilgulim, item 64). He also wrote that the soul of Moshe clothed 
in Rashbi to correct the soul of Achiya HaShiloni (Ahijah the Shilonite), who 
“corrupted” Malchut on account of the sin of King Yerav’am (Jeroboam), which 
prompted the transgression of all Israel. Hence, the soul of Rashbi appeared 


15 



16 


The Zohar 


to correct Israel’s sins. The part of The Zohar titled Raya Meheimna (Loyal 
Shepherd) relates how Rashbi attained the soul of Moshe, merged with it, and 
attained the supernal wisdom. 

In his works Maranan ve Rahanan and Kli Yakar (M elachim, 2, 12), the great 
HaChida also says that Rashbi’s entire work lay in correction of the sin of 
Achiya HaShiloni. 

As Rashbi says in the Talmud ( Sukkah , 45, 2): “I can redeem the entire 
world from judgment from the day of my birth to the present day. And if my 
son is with me, from the day the world was created to the present day. And if 
Yotam Ben Uziyahu is with us, from the day the world was created to its end.” 
The book of Melachim narrates about Yotam Ben Uziyahu (20, 15). 

After the verdict was lifted, Rashbi founded his seminary in the settlement 
of Tekoa and in the village of Meron. There he taught his disciples Kabbalah 
and wrote The Book of Zohar, thereby revealing what was forbidden to reveal from 
the time of Israel’s reception of the Torah (T ikuney Zohar, Hakdamah, p. 17). 

However, to write down all the secrets of the Torah, Rabbi Shimon had 
to express them in a secret form. Rashbi’s disciple, Rabbi Aba, had a unique 
quality to his soul. This quality enabled him to convey spiritual knowledge in 
a secret, concealed form. Hence, Rabbi Shimon asked his disciple to express 
his thoughts for him, that is, to commit Rashbi’s thoughts to paper. The ARI 
explained it in the following way: “The Book of Zohar must remain concealed 
until the generation of the coming of the M ashiach (Messiah), as through the 
study of this book will humankind return from its spiritual exile” (The ARI, 
Shaar HaHakdamot, Hakdamah, p. 3). That is why Rabbi Aba wrote the teachings 
of Rabbi Shimon in Aramaic, as it is the reverse side of Hebrew. 

The ARI wrote (Maamarey Rashbi (Articles of Rashbi), p. 100) that the writing 
of The Zohar in a secret form was possible because the soul of Rabbi Aba 
originated from the Surrounding Light, and not from the Inner Light. For this 
reason, the ARI explained, he could express the most supernal wisdom in a 
secret form as simple stories. 

(Rabbi Shimon lived approximately to the age of eighty and passed away on 
the holiday of Lag BaOmer, the eighteenth day in the month Iyar, surrounded by 
his disciples, and recognized by the entire nation. This day is celebrated as the 
holiday of Light. Rabbi Shimon’s body was buried in a cave off Mount Meron, 
and the body of his son, Rabbi Elazar, is buried a few meters from him.) 

Like the subsequent compositions of the ARI and other Kabbalists (evidently, 
such is the lot of all true spiritual books), The Book of Zohar was concealed for 



Introduction 


17 


some 1,100 years in a cave near Meron, since the day it was written, until an 
Arab man found it and sold it in the market as wrapping cloth. 

Part of the torn sheets fell into the hands of a sage, who recognized and 
appreciated the value of the writings. After a long search, he recovered many 
sheets from refuse bins or bought them from spice vendors, who were selling 
their merchandise wrapped in the sheets of The Zohar. It was out of these 
recovered sheets that the book (as we know it today) was compiled. 

For many centuries, since that time until today, The Book of Zohar has been 
the subject of controversy. Philosophers, scientists, and other “sages,” still 
debate it today. Yet, the fact remains that only a Kabbalist, one who ascends to a 
particular spiritual degree, attains what this book conveys. To all other people, it 
seems like a collection of narratives, stories, and ancient philosophy. Only those 
who do not comprehend this book argue over it; but Kabbalists know for certain 
that Rashbi’s book is the greatest source of spiritual attainment that the Creator 
imparted upon the people in this world. 

Although The Book of Zohar was written in the second century, only Rabbi 
Yehuda Ashlag was able to provide a full commentary on it in the 1930s-40s. The 
reason for the concealment of The Zohar from the second century to thirteenth 
century and the lack of a complete commentary on it for eighteen centuries is 
explained in the “Introduction to the Book of Zohar.” 

Rabbi Ashlag called his commentary HaSulam (The Ladder) because by 
studying it, one can ascend the spiritual degrees of attainment of the Upper 
Worlds as one would climb a ladder in our world. Following the publishing of 
the Sulam commentary, Rabbi Ashlag received the epithet Baal HaSulam (Owner 
of the Ladder), as it is customary among sages of the Torah to call a person not 
by his name, but according to his highest attainment. 

THE BOOK OF ZOHAR CONTAINS: 

1. Hakdamat Sefer HaZohar (The Introduction of the Book of Zohar)—containing 
several articles that fully reveal the inner meaning of the Torah. 

2. Sefer HaZohar (The Book of Zohar)— divided into parts and chapters that 
correspond to the weekly portions of the Torah: 

The Book of Beresheet (Genesis): Beresheet, Noach, Lech Lecha, Vayera, Chaiey 
Sarah, Toldot, Vayetze, Vayishlach, Vayeshev, Miketz, Vayigash, Vayichi. 

The Book of Shemot (Exodus): Shemot, Vayera, Bo, Beshalach, Yitro, Mishpatim, 
Terumah (Safra de Tzniuta), Tetzaveh, Ki Tissa, Veyikahel, Pekudey. 



18 


The Zohar 


The Book of Vayikra (Leviticus): Vayikra, Tzav, Shmini, Tazria, Metzura, 
Acharey, Kedushim, Emor, BaHar, Vechukotay. 

The Book of Bamidbar (Numbers): Bamidbar, Naso (ldra Raba ), Baalotcha, 
Shlach Lecha, Korach, Chukat, Balak, Pinchas, Matot. 

The Book of Devarim (Deuteronomy): VeEtchanen, Ekev, Shoftim, Titze, 
Vayelech, Haazinu (ldra Zuta). 

3. Zohar Hadash (The New Zohar): additions to the weekly chapters: 

Beresheet, Noach, Lech Lecha, Vayera, Vayetze, Vayeshev, Bashalach, Yitro, 
Terumah, Ki Titze, Tzav, Acharey, BaHar, Naso, Chukat, Balak, Matot, VeEtchanen, 
Ki Titze, Ki Tavo. 

4. Additional books in The Book of Zohar that are not a direct commentary 
on the Torah: 

ldra Raba, ldra Zuta, Safra de Tzniuta, Raza de Razin, Tosefta, Raya Mi’emna, 
Ashmatot, Si trey Torah, Si trey Otiot, and Tikuney Zohar. 

5. Midrash HaNe’elam (The Commentary on the Writings): Song of Songs, Ruth, 
Eicha (Lamentations)— and on the Torah (Pentateuch). 

Baal HaSulam wrote the commentary on the portions of The Zohar that 
are known to us. His main commentaries in the “Introduction to the Book of 
Zohar” and the chapter “Beresheet” are expressed in terms of man’s spiritual 
work. The most valuable articles of The Zohar for the science of Kabbalah are 
ldra Raba, ldra Zuta, and Safra de Tzniuta. All of them are expressed in the 
language of Kabbalah. Besides these articles, the rest of The Zohar is written in 
the language of Midrash. 

In its original form, The Book of Zohar— written by Rabbi Aba sixteen centuries 
ago—was not divided into weekly chapters. Its volume was several times larger 
than the text that reached us; it expounded not only the Torah, but also twenty- 
four other books of the Bible (Pentateuch, Prophets, and Writings). 

Besides The Book of Zohar itself, Rabbi Shimon’s book of Tikkunim (correc¬ 
tions) had reached us, as well. It comprises seventy commentaries on the first 
word of the Torah, Beresheet (in the beginning), since it includes everything. 

This book offers a semantic translation of The Zohar itself, Rabbi Yehuda 
Ashlag’s The Sulam commentary, and my own explanations. The book also 
contains the first part of The Book of Zohar—Hakdamat Sefer HaZohar (Introduction 
of The Book of Zohar). 



Introduction 


19 


At the beginning of the text, the semantic translation is given in bold script. 
The Sulam commentary and my explanations are in regular script or italics 
because it turned out to be extremely difficult to separate my explanations 
from Rabbi Ashlag’s holy texts. The numbers at the beginning of the items 
correspond to the numbers of the items in The Book of Zohar with The Sulam 
commentary, vol. 1. 

The reason for the interlacing of texts is the need to explain the meaning 
of The Zohar in several languages simultaneously: a) the language of Kabbalah 
(Sefiro t, Partzufim, Gematria, and worlds), b) the language of spiritual work 
(emotions), c) the language of the Torah (narrative), and d) the language of the 
Talmud (judicial). 

To comprehend the style of The Book of Zohar, I recommend the reader 
to return to the translation of the original text after reading and mastering 
the commentary. 

The Book of Zohar, like the whole of the Torah, speaks exclusively of man 
(creation) and his relationship with the Creator. The Torah attaches worldly 
appellations to all of man’s inner properties. Thus, the aspiration to the Creator 
is called “Israel,” and the aspiration to selfish reception of pleasures is called 
“nations of the world.” However, there is no connection whatsoever between 
these names in the Torah and the Jews and other nations in our world. Kabbalah 
appeals to man, to creation! 

The book contains articles commented upon in the language of Kabbalah, 
and others commented upon in the language of emotions, which is easier to 
understand for the beginner. The reader can begin the study of the book with such 
articles as “Night of the Bride,” and “Who rejoices on holidays.” Nevertheless, 
a complete study of The Zohar entails systematic learning of the material. The 
more accustomed we are to Kabbalah, the more it permeates our hearts, and it 
can only be mastered by repeatedly reviewing the studied material. 

Rav Michael Laitman 





List of Abbreviations and Explanations 


AA —Arich Anpin —the Pcirtzuf of Hochma, the central, initial Partzuf in the world 
of Atzilut, from which all the other Partzufim originate. 

Aba—Father —the Partzuf of Hochma. 

Ima— Mother—the Partzuf of Bina. 

ZA—Zeir Anpin—Son (with regard to AVI). 

ZON—ZA and Nukva—Malchut. 

Nukva, Malchut—a Sefira (singular for Sefirot) or Partzuf that receives from all 
the preceding Partzufim (plural for Partzuf). Malchut of the world of Atzilut is the 
sum of all the creatures, all human souls. For this reason it is called Knesset Israel 
(The Assembly of Israel). 

Israel—the property of “bestowal,” altruism. This is the property of the Creator, 
the property of Bina. Israel derives from the Hebrew words Yashar— straight, and 
El—the Creator. Thus, Israel is the property of aspiring to attain equivalence of 
form with the Creator. The “nations of the world” are the aspiration to selfish 
reception of pleasure. Naturally, these two properties are present in everyone, 
and Kabbalah is the method for the development of the property of Israel within 
man, with the purpose of attaining the Creator in this life. 

Kli (vessel) egoistic desires and aspirations are not considered a Kli. A Kli is the 
corrected desires, suitable for reception of Light. These are altruistic desires with 
a screen that has transformed them from egoism into altruism. 

The human heart that receives all sensations is called the Kli (vessel) of 
reception of sensations. The spiritual vessel, the only vessel that The Zohar speaks 
of, is the desire to bestow upon the Creator: to hand over all of man’s desires to 
the Creator, as though saying that he agrees with all his heart to relinquish all of 
himself for His sake. Such a complete and true intention is called “Lishma” (for 
the Creator’s sake). 


21 



22 


The Zohar 


SEFIROT 

THE CREATOR’S NAMES 

KETER 

EKYEH=Aleph-Hey-Yod-Hey 

HOCHMA 

YAH= Yod-Hey 

BINA 

HaVaYaH with Nikud Elokim 

HESED 

EL=Aleph-Lamed 

GEVURA 

ELOKIM= Aleph-Lamed-Hey-Yod-Hey 

TIFFERET 

HaVaYaH with Nikud of Shvah-Holam-Kamatz 

NETZAH and HOD 

TZEVAOT 

YESOD 

SHADDAY=Shin-Dalet-Yod or EL=Aleph-Lamed CHAkChet-Yod 

MALCHUT 

ADNI=Aleph-Dalet-Nun-Yod 


Mittuk (sweetening/mitigation) of a restriction law. Restriction is a ban for 
Malchut to receive Light. This ban is lifted when Malchut is corrected by the 
properties of Bina. 

Zivug— coupling—is translated as a sexual union between a man and a woman in 
this world. Since spiritual actions are absolutely detached from the way we would 
normally perceive them, I have chosen to use the Hebrew term Zivug, as it is more 
abstractedly perceived by people with no knowledge of Hebrew. This will help 
prevent confusions based on previously existing conceptions. The spiritual Zivug 
is an aspiration of the Upper One (ZA—male part) to pass the Light (pleasure) 
to the lower one (Malchut—female part). In doing so, both desires are completely 
selfless, as in the example of the guest and the host. 

PBP—Panim be Panim (face to face). This state occurs when a Zachar (male Sefira), 
or Aba (father), passes O hr Hochma (Light of Wisdom) to the female Sefira, or 
Ima (mother), for the subsequent transfer to the children (ZON). The same 
relationships of ABA (see below) and PBP also transpire between their children, 
ZON (ZA and Malchut ). 

ABA - Achor be Achor, back to back (pronounced Ach be Ac h). If Partzuf Aba 
(Hochma) has Ohr Hochma, but is unwilling to pass it on to Partzuf Ima (Bina), 
and if Ima also does not want to receive it, such a relationship between them is 
called back to back. The same relationship can exist between ZA and Malchut. 

Hesed— mercy, compassion, altruism, Ohr Hassadim (the Light of Mercy, 
compassion, and altruism). It appears only within a Kli (desire) that wishes to 













List of Abbreviations and Explanations 


23 


give selflessly and be similar to the Creator. This is the property of the Sefira or 
Partzuf of Bina. Bina of the world of AK (Adam Kadmon) is called SAG. Bina of 
the world of A tzilut is called Ima, the Supernal Mother, YESHSLT, and AVI. 
The Light of Bina is the pleasure of being similar to the Creator’s properties; 
hence, this Light (sensation) is the most reliable protection from the impure 
forces. And the Kli that possesses the properties of Bina is unable to transgress, 
as its desire is solely to bestow. 

KHB—Keter-Hochma-Bina (pronounced Kahab). These are the first three Sefirot 
that form the Rosh (head) of the Partzuf. The Rosh decides how much pleasure 
the Partzuf can accept not for its own sake but for the sake of the Creator. This 
Light descends from the Rosh to the Guf (body). 

HBD-Hochma-Bina-Daat (pronounced Habad). This is the same as Keter-Hochma- 
Bina (the Rosh of the Partzuf). Sefira Daat is not a Sefira, but the request (also 
known as MAN) of ZON (Zeir Anpin and Nukva). Daat is the appeal of ZON to 
Bina regarding their desire to receive O hr Hochma from her. This prayer of ZON 
is called MAN, for it ascends to Bina and evokes in Bina (Ima—their mother) the 
desire to bestow upon her children—ZON. MAN in Bina is called Sefira Daat. 
This is not a Sefira like the other ten Sefirot ; it is rather a request. However, to 
stress this state, we use the name HBD instead of KHB. 

HQ T -Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet (pronounced Hagat). These are the Sefirot of the Guf 
(body), similar to the Sefirot of the Rosh: Hesed is tantamount to Keter, Gevura is 
tantamount to Hochma, and Tifferet is tantamount to Bina. They are called GE 
(see below) of the body. 

NHYM-Netzah-Hod-Yesod-Malchut (pronounced Nehim). These Sefirot receive 
from the Sefirot HGT (GE). Since they receive and have the will to receive, they 
are called AHP of the body. 

QE-Galgalta-Eynaim (skull and eyes). Sefirot Keter-Hochma- and GAR of Bina. 
These Sefirot do not have the will to receive and wish only to bestow. Hence, 
they cannot become egoistic. 

NRN -Nefesh-Ruach-Neshama (pronounced Naran). This is the Light that fills the 
small Partzuf. Katnut (small state) is when the Partzuf has the strength (a screen) 
only to bestow, but is unable to receive for the Creator’s sake, despite its desire 
to do so. In this case, the Partzuf has only O hr Hassadim (Light of Mercy), but 
not O hr Hochma (Light of Wisdom). This is why it is considered a small Partzuf, 
without strength and reason, similar to a child in our world. 

AHP-Awzen-Hotem-Peh (ear-nose-mouth), pronounced Ahap. These are Sefirot 
ZAT of Bina-ZA-Malchut, which possess a will to receive. Therefore, in the 



24 


The Zohar 


absence of a proper screen (resistance to that desire), they become egoistic. 
A Partzuf without a screen on its AHP is called Katan (small) and its state is 
called Katnut (smallness, incompleteness). It is like a child in our world, as this 
Partzuf, too, has no strength (screen), and can therefore have only O hr Hassadim 
without Ohr Hochma). 

Qadlut —big state. A Partzuf with a screen (strength to resist its egoistic nature) 
to not only refrain from receiving for its own sake, but to receive not for its own 
sake (as in the example of the guest and the host. In this case, the Partzuf fills all 
of its desires (all ten Sefirot) with the Lights of Hassadim and Hochma. 

First Big State —Gadlut Aleph, the attainment of the Light of Neshama. 

Second Big State—Gadlut Bet, the attainment of the Light of Haya. 

Ohr Hochma —Light of Wisdom. This Light fills the Kelim (vessels/desires) of 
reception. It comes only if there is a screen on altruistic reception. 

A teret Yesod—literarily “foreskin,” the place of union between Israel and the 
Creator. After the second restriction, it is forbidden to make a Zivug (spiritual 
coupling) on Malchut herself due to the absence of the screen. However, a 
Zivug can be made on the properties that Malchut received from ZA, called 
Ateret Yesod. Just as the desires of Malchut herself are cut off, the foreskin is 
circumcised, and the desires that remain within her are those received from 
ZA, called Ateret Yesod. On these desires, Malchut can make a Zivug with ZA, 
and receive the Light of Hochma. Naturally, this is not the same Light of 
Hochma that Malchut would receive if she were able to make a Zivug on her 
desires, that is, on herself, on her own properties, called “the central point of 
creation,” the truly egoistic desires. Malchut will be able to do that only after 
6,000 years, at the end of correction. But before that happens, these desires 
are called the mark of union with the Creator, since a Zivug on Ateret Yesod 
brings her closer to the Creator. 

Ateret Yesod is also Malchut de Malchut that remains after the circumcision, 
the removal of the O rla (foreskin). This is the corrected part of Malchut, her 
unification with Sefira Yesod, upon which a Zivug can be made while still during 
the 6,000 years, thus bringing Malchut to the end of correction. 

NRNHY—Nefesh-Ruach-Neshama-Haya-Yechida (pronounced N aranhay). This 
Light fills the big Partzuf consisting of GE and AHP. 

Ohr (Light)—pleasure, the sensation of the Creator. Ohr should always be inter¬ 
preted as the same concept, for although the term is used in general, all of its 
synonyms are implied! 



List of Abbreviations and Explanations 


25 


Kli (vessel)—desire, creature. Like Ohr, the word Kli is used in general, but all of 
its synonyms are implied! 

Qematria —numerical value of a letter, or a combination of letters and words. 
This is a special way of recording spiritual information. 

Parsa— firmament, the division between the world of Atzilut and the worlds 
BYA. The Parsa divides the ten Sefirot into two parts: the altruistic Kelim of 
bestowal (GAR, KHB, and GE) and the Kelim of reception ( ZON or Bina-ZA- 
Malchut), for Bina deliberately fell into ZA (AHP ) with the purpose of correcting 
him. Malchut, which ascends above Bina and stands below Hochma, is called 
Parsa or “firmament,” and separates GE from AHP. 

ZAT, ZAK—the seven Sefirot Hesed, Gevura, Tifferet, Netzah, Hod, Yesod, Malchut 
(HGT NHYM). 

VAT, VAK—the six Sefirot Hesed, Gevura, Tifferet, Netzah, Hod, Yesod (HGT NHY, 
pronounced Hagat Nehy). 

De - the preposition ‘of in a possessive meaning. For example, Malchut de 
Atzilut means Malchut of the world of Atzilut. 

English translation—Whenever it says so in parenthesis, this refers to the 
books of the Torah (Pentateuch), Nevi’im (Prophets), and Ketuvim (Writings/ 
Hagiographa), published by Mosad HaRav Kook, in Hebrew with English 
translation. For example, (Yeshayahu, 11:9; English translation p. XXX, 9) means 
that if you open page XXX in the book of Prophets, what you are looking for 
will be in sentence number nine. When the original source is indicated, it is 
recommended to refer to it there and then to read at least the passage that the 
quoted saying is ascribed to. This will help you to see even more clearly that the 
Torah, using an allegorical, figurative language, speaks only of the spiritual world 
and man’s ascension to it, and not at all about history or about our world. 

Garments—attributes, desires, Kelim. Generally, the garments in question are 
those that Malchut receives from Bina. 

Huppah—n wedding baldachin, a canopy under which a marriage ceremony 
takes place. 

Nartik —the covering of ZA; same as the Huppah. 

Adornments—the Light of Hassadim, Light of Bina, which she passes into 
Malchut. This corrects Malchut, and enables her to receive the Light of Hochma 
in the Light of Hassadim. 

Orla —foreskin on the Sefira Yesod, the place of the Zivug between ZA and Malchut. 
The Orla must be removed, for during the 6,000 years, it is impossible to make 



26 


The Zohar 


a Z ivug (intention) on Malchut herself and receive for the Creator’s sake. Only a 
Z ivug on the union of Malchut with ZA can be made. This is called Ateret Yesod, 
the part of the Sefira Yesod that remains after the cutting off of the O rla. Orla is 
also Malchut de Malchut, or the impure forces. 

Ima— Mother— Bina with regard to Malchut, who is the daughter. 

Daughter— Malchut with regard to Bina, mother. 

Kodesh ha Kodashim— Holy of Holies— the Light of GA R-Nesharna-Haya-Yechida. 
Question— the sensation of lack of the Light of Hochma in Malchut. 

Sela —rock or truth. The name of Malchut. 

Shechina— Divinity—the sensation (appearance, vision) of the Creator to those 
who attain Him. Malchut in the state of reception of the Light (the Creator) is 
called Shechina. The sensation of the Creator, the place where one experiences 
the Creator is called Shechina. 

Techum— zone—the distance beyond the bounds of which one is forbidden to 
go on Shabbat (the Sabbath). Techum Shabbat constitutes the maximal distance 
within which one can move about during Sabbath. 

Sigim— dross—impure desires that exist within pure desires. Man’s work is to 
separate the two, and to gradually correct the Sigim. The term Sigim comes from 
SAG, for they appeared as a result of the breaking of the Kelim of the world of 
Nekudim, which refer to the system of the Partzufim of Partzuf SAG. The term 
Sigim found its way from Kabbalah into spoken Hebrew. 

SHACH-Shin-Chaf—300 + 20 = 320 fragments of the broken vessel. 

RAPACH-Reish-Peh-Chet—200 + 80 + 8 = 288 fragments of the broken vessel, 
which one can and must be corrected during the 6,000 years, by climbing the 
6,000 steps of the spiritual ladder. 

Lev ha Even— Stony Heart—Lev = Lamed-Bet = 30 + 2 = 32 fragments into which 
Malchut had broken. These fragments of Malchut cannot be corrected and made 
altruistic; one can only refrain from using these desires. Lev ha Even is corrected 
only after the 6,000 years, that is, after the Creator Himself corrects the 288 
fragments within man. It becomes completely altruistic and receives the name 
Lev Basar (heart of flesh). 

Lo Lishma —not for the sake of the Creator. Since nothing exists in creation but 
the Creator and man, if something is not done “for the sake of the Creator,” it is 
done “for one’s own sake.” Thus, Lo Lishma denotes man’s egoistic intention. 



List of Abbreviations and Explanations 27 

Lishma —for the Creator’s sake. Man’s selfless intention to act only to please 

and bring joy to the Creator. 


Four angels that participate in 

the creation of man—the four basic properties 

of nature: mercy— Hesed, justice- 

-T zedek, truth—Emet, and peace—Shalom. 

Eretz Israel—Land of Israel— Yetzira of this world. Yerushalaim (Jerusalem) is 

Ateret Yesod in Malchut. 


ORIGINAL 

NAMES AND THEIR 

EQUIVALENTS ACCEPTED IN THE 

ENGLISH TRANSLATION 

Aaron - Aaron 

Leah - Leah 

Amon - Ammon 

Lilit - Lilith 

Ana’el - Anahel 

Machaniel - Manhiel 

Anafiel - Anafiel 

Matat - Metatron 

Ariel - Ariel 

Micha - Micah 

Avraham - Abraham 

Moav - Moab 

Bat Sheva - Bathsheba 

Moshe - Moses 

Benayahu - Benaiah 

Nachum - Nahum 

Betzalel - Betzalel 

Navuchadnetzar - Nebuchadnezzar 

Bil’am - Balaam 

Nechemia - Nehemiah 

Chagai - Haggai 

Noach - Noah 

Chava - Eve 

Ovadia - Obadiah 

Eden - Eden 

Petachia - Petahyah 

Eicha - Eichah 

Pinchas - Pinchas 

Elisha - Elisha 

Pisgania - Pesagniyah 

Eliyahu - Elijah 

Rahel - Rachel 

Esav - Esau 

Rivka - Rebecca 

Ester - Esther 

Rut - Ruth 

Ezra - Ezra 

Sandalphon - Sandalphon 

Gavri’el - Gabriel 

Shet - Seth 

Gazaria - Gazardiel 

Shimon - Simeon 

Hanoch - Eunuch 

Shlomo - Solomon 

Havakuk - Habakkuk 

Shmuel - Samuel 

Iyov - Job 

Tamar - Tamar 

Korach - Korach 

Tzefania - Zephaniah 



28 


The Zohar 


Tzur - Tyre 
Yaakov - Jacob 
Yehoyada - Jehoiada 
Yechezkel - Ezekiel 
Yehoshua - Joshua 
Yehudah - Judah 
Yerushalaim - Jerusalem 


Yeshayahu - Isaiah 
Yirmiyahu - Jeremiah 
Yishmael - Ishmael 
Yitzchak - Isaac 
Yosef - Joseph 
Zachariah - Zechariah 
Zvuliel - Zebuliel 


ORIGINAL TITLES AND THEIR 
EQUIVALENTS ACCEPTED IN THE 
ENGLISH TRANSLATION 

Beresheet - Genesis 

Shemot - Exodus 

Vayikra - Leviticus 

Bamidbar - Numbers 

Devarim - Deuteronomy 

Kohelet - Ecclesiastes 

Shmuel 1 and 2 - Samuel 1 and 2 

Melachim 1 and 2 - Kings 1 and 2 

Divrey HaYamim - Chronicles 

Mishley - Proverbs 

Tehilim - Psalms 

Shir HaShirim - Song of Songs 

Shoftim - Judges 



An Example of the Original 
Text of The Zohar 

jsa .Dvrinn pa naanBo ,a'na nnns mp?n 'an (s 
,naBnff n'si naanff msn paa J?snff' naaa sn piaant? 
cps ,mim paia na ms a'mnn pa 'msn naanv na 
na'bn na ms naanar na .'ami pi na ms *?snan naaa 
pnnan »Dim jVoa na'bn na ms bsnB” row eps pby 
p'ss ,nanm snyiya ,wm a'p^s eps,snn&a baa nb 
.nb snaabi bsnB” naaab snnab pa'n na'bn 
paa ,snns saa? nans 'sas .snns saar nans nnabi (a 
,&yan pa'si .naanarb pnnan ps'pn pby tyan spssb 
did ,a'na sn sn byi.pynn Bran pammyian pnps 
■pnaxs nana but did .nana bv did sn , mx mjw 
xann naanan sanaa ,iw sbi jyaas t?an by nnab 
si ,naanan .jyass Biom scan ps'pn pby a>an by 
nsmbn a'pbs ny sa”an a'pbsa ,nana bw did ims 
, raansi nansn ns ,nsbnbi jsaa .pa'n i?an 
sni .synr na p'ssi narwa bsyn sinn mnaa b'bansi 

.area mna msa sa"p py nps 
paw pnm pyansa ants mnan saprn naai (a 
pyansa ,anaa ss'ba saB> ynnrs -ja .synrsinn 

.matron snaiyn pinspnnn 
D'asan ,pnsa isna a'axan nns pyetf 'an .m«wna n 
panbam ava pna's ,pnsa isna .mawnan snaiy sn 
sn ,ran mam ny .pnsa isna pna ,pnsn sxim a'nan 
,nmn Vipi .nan msa ,a'2tny mar ma mm py'an an 
.mnbin nayab /iai a'an ixnB” a'nan panan an sn 
anpab mny mm ,ans na>ya a'nan paw an sn yatra 
na>ya ann a'nai ,ans na?ya san a'nan ny'aarb nwy 
.a"nn pns naan imsn ,naa> an sn pamsa .yaaui 


29 






30 


The Zohar 


ibwyi ,n3trnoa V?8yi,ina8 pi'8 p*?8 o'iXin 8"i (n 
ii woo8i iroaa ipa: jnoi .pn ir*Mn8i, *n8i 8D*?ya 
8 yi 83 tpv *?8y .ma noo8i ,cpv T^nw ,owp wa: 
'now .pn Vttn8i p83 i8i: piai ,pn pb anwi 8&mp 

mp 8ny&>3 .pnn8 
,pr>8 p^inn pia inn8 mp m i 8nyt?a «m po^ya 
. 80^0 pa”n pp 5 ? py y*:n morn ny 8nys? 8'nnai 
181 J 1 8 l ?D t ?81 ,p83 1812 MJMm p23 .!3inff8 '808 
.D”pn8 vb 80 *?yi , 8obya pi8n»8 8 1 ? 
'pii' ^p ,p'*?2n8i 1138*? D '121 8o*?y o”po poi o 
. a'tntsw 80 *?y , 80 *?yi p'3i p 2'8 pin ^nn«tt |«y^n 
^po^iy p'3i 'pii' pj'8 p*?8 /f? wya am mn ^imbap 1 ? 

.am o'ana o' 2 i? n'tyyi a'nai 
8ia 'o * 18*11 na' 2 'y duo im» ,nna iry*?8 'i .n'uwia (t 
|8'bn pa''y *?ai mm* 1 ? .in8 J8 1 ? .oa' 2 'y nno 18 ^ .n*?8 
D'no '8m ,pyian pm .D'2'y nna .in'8 pm jrh 
8inn .'"o ,in'8 | 80 i .r\bn 8ia ,nbwb 80 "pi 8p'ny 
*?yi .mniana 80 ”p 8^31 ,8^'y 1 ? own nxpo np8i 

8*?i D'no ni83 im8i ,nbmb 80”pi 
nap ^8m .nbm pn n'b Kb'yb 8m '"o np8 , 8 '*? 2 n 8 

.'"0 '1p8 D'O^H 

8*?8 ,'8nV '8n pa no ,n"o 'ip8i 8nn 5 ? 8in8 m8i (n 
na bmi p'a ,r68ff‘? 8D"p v, o np8i n 80 'no n 80 ip 
*?a eyio iy 8211 1 ? 82110 yiaoVi 8 l ?anD8 5 ? syasyaoi m 
no / 8n t ?ar»D8 no ,nym no ,mo pn 'ooi p'a ,p 2 ii 

.8moipia D'no 8*?a 8n pn^a^a 
ia .-j b noi8 no pi'y8 no ,3'na 821 8ti ^yi (o 
noi8 noi -p'y8 no , 1081 8*?p p'aa ,8tfinpo 'a annn8 




An Example of the Original Text of The Zohar 


31 


poi'D in nmnDK kdvi kdi' *?nn pp'nK .td Kinnn ,1*? 
.pKn riKi o'Dffn hk dim Dnn 'mnrn n'nan .pKDnp 
pnsm ^b nnnr ,etod Kmm Kinnn , 1 s ? nonK noi 
mm nK?n n'non .kd'tj? br lis 1 ?^ i*? nnnr ,ps?'np 
mna n'unn ob^im i 1 ? Ki'np .mi 'B' nb'bn inDK'tr 
Kin 'an ,nnim niKn Kiiiia ,~\b m^K no ,nb nnant? 
Kennp kdjj -jn Kntm p*?Kj> sbi Kiiiia ,vfrvh *?ia'na 
nr nb^xh KiK *?w'k K^n if? kjmik on ,p«nnp Knnon 
^Kin p^n non: in'K Kni .Knn 1 ? -jD^niK in p^nn 
dm bnni ,Kan niKn Knami .Kbon maw Kn Kinnn 
,1*? Kan' '"d .KniiDKi KB"p i*? n'*?n KD'n 'ki .pair 
Ksm ,,n*n K»”p K*?an ,nnby nKD'no Kinn Kinn 'Km 

•I 1 ? D'pl'l i 1 ? 

Km ,Knn*? D'Dtm rrap n"D ^'j? 1 ? D'Dtm nxp '"D {' 
nxpn p prapn *?k nupn jd nnno in'Kn apr' mm 
pin ,n"D in'Kn nKnnn nspn *?k ,'"d in'Kn nKDnp 
♦n*?K Knn 'D ,Kn by) .Kn'r^DKn D'Kpn 
Knn kd'hd '*?in'i ,i*?'D pios 'in nfj&K trn n&K (K' 
'nn nnn nrjj^K 'nn p'nir .pnm k b xnby 'inn nK*?r 
'K .n^K 'kd pirn^K ,py»t? tk .Knn Knn D'Kpi ,p»D» 
PK'nnnK mom ,mnn fan pnnK Kn ,'*?roi K'nnn KD'n 
aina 1 ? k 1 ? ,pD'no pte by 'K .mi d'd^ m nnnn K w na 

.in'K K"*?inK Knn n*?K 
1 'n by Ki'inn nn kdi' nn ,K'*?iriK k 1 ? Kn Kn k*?k (n' 
.n*?K Knn 'D Kin no nnm ; n p 5 ? n»Ki ln^K khki ,kd' 
m 5 ? n'Kn mnpn Knmr ,pn'*?'m K'Dtr p*?K ,rvh Ki'DK 
nKnK 'n n'nnn ,rrh Knnn*?i pnn K^anDK 1 ? iw nn 1 ? 




32 


The Zohar 


-JDt? TIN HD 1J0HN 'H ymZVX nEWD “pDtSf 

.pKn 

Knaooa >*?ai ,n"ap op nin nisoo nbo :n >k w 
kjo jood tei KDODn Knytya .Kin Km ,nK^ 
nnD 1 ? p^o Km ,Knn nmpa Ktrna nay ^^am 1 ? 

bD na ppn pmo to na mo .naamD 

.ps^a 

Kirs nnn is^a kdod Ktrnp Kaoia ia tp^aKi (t 
, nat?nD ud poan Kpoy Ka^aa ptrnp trip hhdtid 
bodi pop .kd^p k*n KD”p Ka^aa 1 : Knno >0 npKi 
kdbo npnK*?i K^anK 1 ? Kya .no k*?k np« k 1 ? .kdbo 
n wt ?K p^Di /Hjk Knai ,n*»nan np> tsna^a Bo^riKi ,Kn 
.dm^k kobo d^toki p*?«a p*?K pinK pnannK .kobo 
iam paw .do^k kobo p^o k 1 ? n^K Kna Kb nyi 
.bHrwn •pn'rK nhx rm Nan Kn by .K^aya 
cjnntPKn kdbt Kin on ,n^Ka >0 cpn^Kn noai 00 

,mnn 

maoi .rvh «aon k^i in^K nnai .Koby D”pnK Kn Kna 
n?y*?K on khk .n*?n Knnoi Kn by Kaa>piKn nte Kaym 
Kb Kbd?K pnDKi oa ,nop in&nt?Ki K*nan in^ai 

.n Kn ynvtib KbK Knbyb KaoK 




An Example of the Original Text of The Zohar 


33 



mcuitun inND 

noJD q & st f 7]ww isa jrmnn pa mantra «« b mo ,nio (s 
D’mnn u pa ’msi mt*w na j ,mnv nnn nww iron paa a .Virwn 


nixona ’BiVn 


nntn mica 


pa ’.Tin m mnw na D’ninn pa nnnra k"j k maw iln’m n’ nriVin nn mx x-a (a tw) (h 
mm* mm pia x*j a .(maVn iikj nai D’mnn n’ npn jbw max ob ’raw m xwn ’a tow 
pa imm mn* na mi x*i a .i»P mnw mm T"D a’ ’ irtxn id pnnxi nsw jxw no on» 


.(1>*.ix) nai D’ninn 


nm n"t : ns >p n*Pn aw i*an .ks •p man 
.now nm (a .3’ 


5m fa .ih;5t) najo naa nm (a 5m (n DSX Til 


oVion 


nvBOB? dwb .ma^ai nnxDn ,na’a .naan 
mn nn’BO vv naira nWna mxBnn 

-K^TKI ,X»X i PB1S1B tPBn 12?3» pi .’"na 

naan .psax -pax n©a 'pa -man .nn 
'pa -niaVai rrn .xaxi xax Dim 'pa nrai 
hud aiu niN’i) .xapiai psax *i’si nwa 
.('n nm rmpn mma nirngn ”d nn’gnn 

'a o*n nwia ’a’ 't tioip ,$ni 
't ana «r»w .m^’xxn xapiai x"i pBinsn 
itoa max .^aa .niaVai ’"na rran nn’BO 
xax tx .nxana rpipxna mryan n’ainan 
rfr’nna amx l^’xxn ,a"in ama ,xaxi 
*l»»na ana ama» .ni^nan «jio ny aminnn 
ixa •pim Txana nr payi .’a© ’B^x xn© 

.m©xna nmta 

4m- xapian nix’aa nns mptn mi 
'pan fu»an x\n© jtaxa nm'mxx no nxa 1 ? 

ova 


n’pm m s'iai rifle rppm 'n (x 
’na axiiu .D’mnn pa na©i©a ,aina .nrie 
N’ntu .^xn©’ noaa x’n it .Tumi .na©i© 
na juro ©’i na©i© ©’© ai©a .niaan 
ix ta^i dvtx na ©’ D’mnn pa na©i© 
nau?iu? na .D’ami pi na ©’ ‘rxn©’ noaa 
na ©’ ton©’ noaa -p .d’ 1 ?? a"’ na ©’ 
‘raa nmx niaaoan D’amn nna a*’ 
irvn ixaa© mpmiu .d’ptoi <ix .nmx 
x’xin ,nauE? ny»a ,Bip^X ma mtuNia 
.maiaPi Vxntc” noaa nx aao 1 ? D’^a a*’ 
,nmn .fixm .nxi .D’ncun ,nx : intu 
u”ni .mn ,mnn pig .bv ,iomi pnm ,inn 
/iai ngmn D’ppx id 

,nna pn nn’so nwy .onann mx’a 
,mn ,nxa ,mxsn «miaa -non .na’a ,naan 
.nna .wan pn xin np’sn -maVai mo’ 

(K*J 'K >11 ’*181) 










34 


The Zohar 


-inm iso na-rpn a 

nww no .»»mi cn pi (T na ipx Vxntr c? now nix ,-mm paio (J na rv»s 
’anTr pVoo no^n 0 na ipx now nix ,pVj? no’Vn (n o na jpx 

imn mio» 

: ts *p v4n T"n aop ms,i a 1 ?® iibr jsi Rip’i npn ’mi m nV®’i id union y x*a o 
>li rrsn T"n ix® omo (n .Typ win jV® iibr Pi ’mi o : mp >ii n"pn nvyn tbi n®y 
lop S3p d® is r®j idp ’ittr ,13p Mp’i a ,11X11 a’pn urn id® rx’i isp 3’p r» 3 (i .d® i"3n jty 
.i’p .xp .p >ii n"pn in m®Ria m .to 'll a«3n t"D v xxn ’3 isin ix® to® idi on:c rb® 

.D’Uiini ni’i a-'i nnn a- (i ,nu an (n .ns? (i nBX “in 

,i:®ib,i avion IBRD 


■no 1 ? 1131X3 KM ’3 ,TM D3M3 ,13 niXIP3 
naoaip Mxom sum -pis'? na ipinan loan 
P’Vyn iik,i Vy naa km poaaip inn 
itm mxi o"y my nVyai minx 1 ? n’tnai 
iiki D"$r pina -pipaai ,pi Vip iik xnpan 
nnvm ”u) .a’am Vip iik xnpan ,np’ 

nD333 D3 3"yi Cl"’ niN ilMpil ITT]317? 

mnni paion 1333 ’ami pi na mx Vkiip’ 
.DMinn pa naipiipV ip’ip 

’atp Vy iaiyn ,naVtp nipytp dm oni 
iVsatp nVip mainnnn omd iVx m .ipa npy 
iipy ’3tP noa dip lapnna ,V"33 „iK’iaV 
D",l mV’XXa H1KIP3IP in3,l mip31 ,lpa 
in’ omWai .nVyaVa D-nVy iaiyn dm 
mpVnnnn payi .natpiipi pty is^n 93 
?VnV ixana 3 "’ noV nVip o",ny Vip irn 
.DVion mxiaa 

ip’ip ,xapian Vip mViai pman , 13 ,n 
3 "’ noa 0’3iPB3 D,ii .naann niK.ia Dna 
rpK ip"ti .D’amn nna 3 "’ 'pan maipn 
ip’ym Pann ^aa 3 "' na ms ’"3 
irn nxiipna nmnV n’pm 'i Katp na 
km ,Vxhp’ noaa 1 ? dmm,i pan ,i3ipiipa 
nmVia axaa xapiaV ip’ip Vaip ,i 3 iaVV 

Tiy HP3.11 ,133,1 'M3 11333 ,13 KX8ilV “I’lX 

,ip"ti ,ni3Dpn axaa i3”m nnvn nVnna 
pi na kxi’ niaopi paioi mn 1333IP 
kxi’ ni3Dpi pVy 3"’ 13331 .niViaa ’ami 
K’aa Kim .mViaa D’amn nna 3"’ na 
i3’3sVtp D’ainan “px laiaVV naa ,1K3 nxi 
-mViai ni3Dpi DMion 'a oniK DMKaa 
I’IPBBIP 183 ,K3pT3.1 mV’XX3 D’3ni3n 

.'i3i K3,n dmVk *px nVini 

a"' P'bk 'i 3 i sphVk p,ik ,ip"ti 
xam Kipaaip dmVkip ,mia : pain 
nnPKia 


M 3 IP 11 P ,1 IIK ’33 nnDIP mti .dmVk D 1 P 3 
nya k"ti Kapism .K"ii sapisn kmip 
iP"aa ,Vkiip’ no 33 Dipa nmp 3 nmVis 
nasa ki ,naanw mbikip mti ,?VnV 

.Vnian 

VlP axa : D’axa 'a IT , 13 IP 11 P 3 IP’l 
pK tkip ,nnnnnn nVnn Vip i3”,m ,ni3op 
ipaiVa nainaip ,ira nrm 'mo kVk na 
nVip ni3innnn nn’son 'di mVip ipb3,i iik 
DViya ini .mV’XKa laV mVsiaa nunaa 
tkip ,niVia Vip axa na iiyi .nK’ian 
nK’ian oViy ia nVip niainnnn 0 "D mVyna 
HixisV pay n’aaa kmi -mV’XK.n oViy Vk 
nVya k"t Dy nViy tki .mi’so npya dVip 
D’ lp’aVai niV’xxi mix Dy mip naipV 

KMIP .VxiIP’ DIPa ,K"T 'p3 TKI .DDIK 
n033 DIPa 'p3 K3pl3.ll ,1PK1 ’V ni’niK 
nniKn Va naina noaiaip dip Vy ,Vkiip’ 
Vk Dmx nysipa kmip nVya Vkiip’ Vtp 

.D’ainnnn 

pa naipiip Dipa 'pa niaopn Vip axam 
lapnna nVip mawnnn o*dip diipd ,DMinn 
Vip axam .DMina hkip 3 i ,niV’XK,i iikd 
noaa ik ,Dno naipiip Dipa 'pa mVi3,i 
.naanai n^xi naanip rp« max mi .Vkup’ 

iiT’nx dip ip’ip nna paio pis nam 
iaia mn M 3 aa p 3 ’V mo’VpVi D’SixmV 
,iVip niamnnn d"dip .niaapn Vip axan 
i 3 ”,ni ,nin nana 3 "a na ip’i -nxmaa in 
.D’ 3 ixmV ni’riK dip pxip mVip iroi ’Vaa 
fi'K aimnn pa m’ki nntntr na ip'n 
pi'k Vkup’ nasa t)iK ,nnm paia na 
nya nmVisa oa m mnnV ianni pn na 
tk nViyip D*yx ,Vkhp’ noaa nxipaip 
8 'a ,V *33 nmVis axaa na’an nx mp’aVai 
on> “R ii ’*idi) 




An Example of the Original Text of The Zohar 


35 


a nmn ibo nmpn 

"lo^n ( T p>’dx ,-o7in KTiytya ,83m Ci D’nbK *tik .Krntjo tan n 1 ? prow 

.n 1 ? K-it33*m t torn*' (n now 1 ? mmW p»n 
xpSRV to rxa ,mnx war “dtk ’sax ,8-iriK mbt “iais irnVi (a 
linn jiijrrar paps ,wan tirxi .rmm'? pnoi p»pn py wan m 

msam ’siVn nmn nmoa 

.(Vwk) kV»:Vi t tib oniB (n .ns «p ion T"n w omc » 

: rp n"pn .ns «p n*Vn .ns *p ion t"n 


.nisOpn in DB’iuins -["snin jinuj 'n p’SN nttn Id ,ns5 (n .nd’n ”3 It DOS in 
niBTvn DViOn noKS 


jpe'pri fVy ran .awann mso 
,n*isn o"5? in® .sapon Vr J"n sw 
msa nsann jut *>t» Vy nVya saponr 
(pnio no ?"] 3 ) ,pn Vr hn 'pp ,'p’Vyn 
.no non noon 'n 'pj nr’ mm o"ny ’a 
.nosn no non mmaj 'na niraVna mi 
.•pear pnn mna ,p ps’pn 1’Vy ran iVsi 
1oa» raVnna p’Vyn msn ns aayan 
.ps’pn pVy 'n pn nny 'pj a"yi .naaVi 
jarai .amVy jiitV nosn m’s my ’a 
p’Vyn msn Dy ama sa icanra mVnm 
.Voa .mmaj '.n 'pj an 

nr maw w ow ps’pn pVy 'n iVsi 
: pr .nsmVn awVs ny sjon B’pVsa 
’K»H r*n .lain awn os Vy nsma 
nViys pa nr yarar ,mn« kjdt nans 
sapona s’xwV wa si nr .naisi .nrnn 
pia jwV man anr ,iVs ps’pn pVy 'n 

.mVnjn 

pr j*n msnp: n"isn o"y iVsr nai 
•Voa ,aon a"na msnp: ppi no non 
ms sVs ma’raa p’sr osa ,sm pjyn 
anVyaa a"na nm pVi ,naV Boon 
.noj era 'pj maVai mm ,n"jn a’snpji 

: myran sis 'iai pynri ran ,r»n 
iryj rD’pn pVy 'nr .mVnin nya own 
,r>ynn ranV aonaa an ts .nimai mV 
mm awonn w VapV awins awyr anr 
tki .m ayaa myin B’snpj an pi .nr’ 
,nana Vr bis is myim bib sapon 'pj 
.nanan pona ’Va sapon n’ryj pVooa ’a 
.Von n*n swr 
mm 


nVxsan m’an o"nr .B’nVs sna n’rsna 
ns :jnr a’Va J"’ p’ss ,s"n sapoV 
imai win nnw nsm nsn nsi a’arn 
awVs ny o”m ,mm awn os Vy imm 
j"’ ams Vy aoan ?’3’n i*» iVsr ,s:on 
naiyn aw moa awinn pa mnr Vr pVy 
nram man anr ,Voa ,npa nry or Vy 
.’annn ]V’aa y Vapnr Vsnr’ noaaV 
,nV humVi Vsnr' nB:aV Kins'? .urn 
B’aVrn I’nian pr .B’annn mna r’ ’a 
n’Vs nn’sai maaoa pr nunaa .sapon 
P’w Vy nnarai ,a’ao awo awnxn Vaa 
pman na i’sr tbt Va ’a .aoixwn yjaa 
na r» .mna j"’b naann nnsna a’Vmjn 
.aoixwV npo’ 

nao a'nsi oiai nans nnaVi (a 
nsnin B’pVK iron .nnrts ays n-'pps did 
s’xwV wa sin .nnns ays nao naVi /ui 
.mnrn ns a’aaoan a’rp a’Vy nran 
nran am ,myir’ a’snp: ooun nran iVsi 
,srs niyir’ oia ,ama m ms Vyi ,awyr 
nawx nana Vr oia .nana Vr oia sw it 
iaa ,nm’ sVi myaxs ran Vs nonV 
anr ,a>rp B’Vy nran Vy nano mnrn 
Vr oia s’.n it mnn .myaxs ran m:a 
a’pVs did ny orn a’pVs numn .nana 
09 Pn nanin : inn .a’Va ran ’nVrn 
Tsaa p"in dou w uid pui .nnso nrnn 
sw /in ns w d’ppn ,-inNicu .nsVnVi 
ojaar sinn nwaa Warn tjjji sna:r msn 
nny yv snpj mi ,ym na s’xwi mnra 
nisa sxbj swn ymm .13 iym nrs ws 

.ran nwa 

(K«S 's in ’-ion) 




36 


The Zohar 


LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE 
AFORECITED TEXT FROM ARAMAIC 
INTO ENGLISH 3 

1. Rabbi Hizkiyah opened, “It is written, as a rose among thorns.” That a rose is 
die Assembly of Israel. Because there is a rose and there is a rose, just as a rose 
among thorns is tinged with red and white, die Assembly of Israel consists of 
judgment and mercy. Just as a rose has thirteen petals, the Assembly of Israel 
is surrounded on all sides by die thirteen attributes of mercy. However, Elokim, 
that is here, thought to bring out the thirteen words that surround the Assembly 
of Israel and guard it. 

2. Afterwards, this is mentioned another time. The reason it is mentioned 
another time is to bring out the five rigid leaves that surround the rose. And 
these five stand for salvation. These are also the five gates. 

It is written of this secret, “I will raise the cup of salvation, it is the cup 
of blessing.” The cup of blessing must rest on five fingers, and no more, just 
as a rose rests on five rigid leaves that correspond to the five fingers. And this 
rose is the cup of blessing. From the second to the third mention of the name 
Elokim, there are five words. From here on, the Light was created and concealed, 
enclosed within that covenant, and entered the rose and fructified it. And this is 
referred to as a fructiferous tree, wherein is the seed thereof. And this seed truly 
exists in the letter of the covenant. 

3. And just as the form of the covenant is sown in forty-two conceptions from 
that seed, so is the legislative, special name of creation sown. 

4. In the beginning, Rabbi Shimon opened, the flower buds appeared on the 
earth. “The flower buds” refer to the act of creation. They appeared on the 
earth when, on the third day, as it is said, “And the earth shall pullulate.” 
That was when they appeared on the earth. The time of singing has come, and 
this is the fourth day, when there was a reduction from the Light of Hassadim. 
The voice of the turtle dove refers to the fifth day, where it is written, “Let the 
waters swarm,” so as to produce offspring. “It is heard” refers to the sixth day, 
where it is written, “Let us stand and create man,” and there it is said, “We 
will do and we will hear.” “In our land” refers to the day of Shabba t, which 
represents the Land of Life. 

5. Another meaning is that these flower buds are the Patriarchs who entered the 
thoughts of the future world, and there they are concealed. They emerged from 


3 The translation in the book is semantic and not literal 



An Example of the Original Text of The Zohar 


37 


there in concealment, and concealed themselves in die true prophets. Yosef was 
born and they concealed themselves in him. When Yosef entered die Holy Land 
and founded them there, they appeared in die land (earth) and were revealed 
there. When are they seen? When a rainbow is seen in die world. It is when die 
rainbow is seen that they are revealed. As the time of pruning has come. The 
time has come to eradicate the wicked from the world. Why were die wicked 
saved? Because die flower buds can be seen in the earth. And if they could not 
be seen, they would not have remained in die world, and die world would not 
be able to exist. 

6. Who animates the world and causes the Fathers to appear? It is the voice of 
the children, who study the Torah, meaning that these children of the world 
save the world. In deference to them, “We will make you pendants of gold.” 
Those are the children, children of the world, as is it said, “You shall make two 
Cherubs of gold.” 

7. In the beginning, Rabbi Elazar opened, “Raise your eyes above and see who 
has created this.” Raise your eyes. To what place? To the place where all eyes 
depend on Him. And who is He? He is one who opens eyes. And you will know 
this. It is the concealed At ik, wherein lies the question, who has created this. 
And who is He? MI = who. He is called from the edge of Divine Heaven, where 
everything belongs to Him. As there is a question, He is along a concealed path, 
and does not reveal Himself. He is called MI, as there is no question Above, this 
edge of Heaven is called MI. 

8. And there is another below, called MA. What is between this and that? The 
first one, called MI, is concealed. There is a question in him, because man asks, 
searches and looks, and beholds from degree to degree until the end of all the 
degrees. And after he arrives there, he is asked: MA? (What?). What have you 
learned? What have you seen? What have you investigated, since everything is 
still concealed, just as it was before. 

9. It is written of this secret, “Who can I point out to you? Who can I compare 
you to?” After all, the Temple was destroyed, and a voice came forth and said, 
“What can I point out to you, and what can I compare you to?” The word MA = 
what, testimony, each day and the day of testimony to you from the days of past, 
as it is written: “I call to witness Heaven and earth,” which is like unto you. 

According to the same type, “I adorned you with holy ornaments,” made 
you ruler over the world, as it is written: “Is this the city that was called the 
quintessence of beauty?” and so forth. I have called you, “Jerusalem, a city built 
by me.” “What could be compared to you?” Just as you sit, so he is like Above, 



38 


The Zohar 


just as now the holy nation does not enter into you to perform holy work, so 
I swear to you that I will not enter Above until I dwell down below. This is 
your consolation, as this degree is equal to you in all things. And now that I 
am here, “Your misery is great, like the sea.” And if you claim that there is no 
existence or remedy for you, then Ml (who) shall heal you? It shall be precisely 
that concealed Supernal Degree, which animates all things; it shall heal you, 
and exist within you. 

10. MI is the upper edge of Heaven, MA is die lower edge of Heaven. This was 
inherited by Yaakov, that he shines from edge to edge, from the first edge, which 
is MI, until the last edge, which is MA, for he stands in the middle. Therefore, 
who has created this? 

11. Rabbi Shimon said: Elazar, my son, stop talking and reveal to us the supernal 
secret, which the people of the world know nothing of. Rabbi Elazar was silent. 
Rabbi Shimon wept and said: One minute. Rabbi Shimon said: Elazar, what 
is ELEH (these)? If you say the stars and the signs of the zodiac, have they not 
always been seen? However, MA (what) were created, as it is said, by the word of 
the Creator were the Heavens made. If it is about concealed things, then it is not 
written ELEH, because they are revealed. 

12. But this secret was never revealed, until one day when I was at the seashore, 
Eliyahu came and told me: “Rabbi, do you know what this is, WHO HAS 
CREATED THIS?” I told him: “These are the Heavens and their hosts, the 
works of the Creator, that man can look at them and bless them, as is written, 
‘When I behold Your Heavens, the work of Your hands, our Master, how glorious 
Your name is throughout all the earth’!” 

13. He told me: “Rabbi, there was one thing concealed before the Creator, 
which He revealed to the Supernal Assembly, and it is this. When the concealed 
of all the concealed desired to reveal Himself, He first made one single point, 
and this point ascended and became a Thought. With it, He drew all the forms 
and with it engraved all the images.” 

14. He engraved inside a concealed, sacred candle an image of a concealed 
image of the holy of holies. A profound structure emerged from the depth of 
that thought, and it is called MI - who, which is the inception of the structure 
both standing and not standing, which is hidden deep inside the name. It is not 
called, but only Ml - who. He desired to reveal Himself and to be called this 
name, so He clothed Himself in a precious, radiant garment and created ELEH, 
and ELEH ascended in name. These letters combined with these, and the name 
Elokim was completed. And until He created ELEH - this, Elokim did not ascend 



An Example of the Original Text of The Zohar 


39 


to form the name Elokim. And these sinned in worshipping the golden calf. Of 
this secret it is said, ELEH is your Lord, Israel. 

15. Just as the letters MI joined the letters ELEH, so does this name remain 
forever united, and on this secret stands the world. Eliyahu then flew away, and 
I could not see him. It is from him that I knew this, which stands on the secret, 
and its explanation. Rabbi Elazar has come, and all the disciples, too, and they 
bowed down before him, wept and said, if we had (not) come into this world but 
only to hear this secret, it would have been enough. 

16. Rabbi Shimon said, “Onto these Heavens and their hosts were created in 
MA, as it is said, ‘When I behold the Heavens, the works of Your hands,’ and it 
is said, ‘MA, how glorious Your name is throughout all the earth, which You set 
Above the Heavens, it ascends in name.’ That is why it created Light for Light, 
clothed this into this, and elevated in the Supernal Name, this the Creator 
created in the beginning. This is the Supernal Creator, for MA is not such and 
was not created.” 




The Rose 


1. Rabbi Hizkiyah opened (began): “It is said, as a rose among thorns” (Shir 
HaShirim, 2:2). He asks, “What does a rose represent?” He answers, “It is the 
Assembly of Israel, meaning Malchut. For there is a rose, and there is a rose. 
Just as a rose among thorns is tinged with red and white, so does the Assembly 
of Israel (Malchut) consist of judgment and mercy. Just as a rose has thirteen 
petals, so the Assembly of Israel consists of thirteen properties of mercy, 
surrounding it on all sides. After all, Elokim (the name of the Creator that 
alludes to His attitude towards the lower ones by the force of judgment), as 
it is said, ‘In the beginning, Elokim created’ (the first sentence in the Torah), 
In the beginning (initially) when He thought it, He created thirteen words to 
surround the Assembly of Israel and to protect it, and here they are: THE, 
HEAVEN, ANDTHE, EARTH, ANDTHE EARTH, WAS, EMPTY, AND- 
CHAOTIC, AND-THE DARKNESS, OVER, THE FACE, OF THE ABYSS, 
AND-THE SPIRIT, up to the word Elokim ” (In Hebrew, “and” is written in 
conjunction with the word following it. Hence, it is considered as one word). 

As its object of study, Kabbalah takes the only creation, the only thing that 
exists besides the Creator—man’s self, or “I,” and researches it. This science breaks 
down the self into parts, explains the structure and properties of each part, and 
the purpose of its creation. Kabbalah explains how every part of man’s self, called 
“the soul,” can be changed so that one would reach the goal of creation, the state 
desired by both the Creator and man himself, provided he realizes it. 

There is not a science in the world that can describe, either graphically or 
analytically, through use of formulas, our sensations and desires, and how diverse 
and multifaceted they are. That is how fickle, unpredictable, and absolutely 
distinct they are in everyone. This is because our desires surface in our mind 
and sensations in a gradual order, in a certain sequence, so we may acknowledge 
and correct them. 


41 



42 


The Zohar 


Our self is our essence, the only thing that characterizes an individual. 
However, it is ever-changing, and what remains is merely an external, animate 
shell. This is why it is said that every moment man is born anew. Yet, if this is so, 
how should we regard one another, and how should we perceive ourselves? How 
can we possibly “stabilize” anything within and outside of us if we are constantly 
changing, and all that we perceive is a function of our inner state? 

The Creator is the source of Light (pleasure). Those who draw near Him 
sense Him as such. Such people, who draw near the Creator and thereby sense 
Him, are called Kabbalists (from the word Lekabel —to receive the Creator’s 
Light). One can draw near the Creator only through equivalence of desires. The 
Creator is incorporeal, and can only be sensed with our heart. Naturally, what 
is meant by “heart” is not the pump that mobilizes blood through our veins, but 
the center of man’s every sensation. 

However, one cannot sense the Creator with just his heart, but only with 
a small point in it. And to feel this point, man must develop it himself. When 
one develops and expands this point, the sensation of the Creator, His Light, 
can enter it. 

Our heart is the sum of our egoistic desires, and the small point within it 
is part of the spiritual, altruistic desire implanted from Above by the Creator 
Himself. It is our task to nurture this embryo of a spiritual desire to such an 
extent that it (and not our egoistic nature) will determine all of our aspirations. 
At the same time, the egoistic desire of the heart will surrender, contract, wither, 
and diminish. 

After being born in our world, one is obliged to change his heart from 
egoistic to altruistic, while living in this world. This is the purpose of his life, 
the reason behind his appearance in this world, and it is the goal of all creation. 
A complete replacement of egoistic desires with altruistic ones is called “the 
End of Correction.” Every individual and all of humanity must attain it in this 
world together. Until one achieves this, he will continue to be born into this 
world. The Torah and all the prophets speak exclusively of this. The method of 
correction is called “Kabbalah.” 

One can change his desires only if one wishes to change them. Man is created 
an absolute egoist; he can neither adopt different desires from other people or 
from the surrounding world—as his surroundings are just like him—nor does he 
have any link to the spiritual worlds, since such a link is possible only through 
mutual properties. The spiritual can only be perceived in altruistic desires. 



The Rose 


43 


Hence, an individual in our world has no chance of transcending the 
boundaries of this world on his own. That is why we were given the Torah 
and its most effective part, Kabbalah—to help man acquire the desires of the 
spiritual worlds. 

In order to create man in remoteness to Himself, so that man would realize 
his insignificance and would come independently to the desire to ascend, the 
Creator created all creation as degrees descending from Him. The Creator’s 
Light descended along these degrees, and at the lowest degree, created our world 
and man in it. Having realized his insignificance and wishing to ascend to the 
Creator, man (to the extent that he wishes to approach the Creator) ascends 
along the same degrees by which his initial descent took place. 

In all, there are ten degrees, called “ten Sefirot”: Keter, Hochma, Bina, Hesed, 
Gevura, Tifferet, Netzah, Hod, Yesod, and Malchut. Like ten screens or curtains, 
these ten Sefirot conceal the Creator’s Light from us or the Creator Himself 
(which is the same thing). These ten screens constitute the ten degrees of our 
remoteness from the Creator. 

Therefore, in order to draw near the Creator by one degree, the lowest 
one above our own properties, we must acquire the properties of that (lowest) 
degree. This means that our properties become similar to the properties of that 
degree, rather than remaining inferior to it. To acquire similar properties means 
to have the same desires. As soon as our desires coincide with the desires of 
that degree, its concealment fades, and we seemingly exist on it, and only nine 
degrees separate us from the Creator. 

However, the last, lowest degree differs from all the others: as soon as one 
ascends out of our world and onto the first degree, he already begins to see 
(sense) the Creator. And all the subsequent degrees are degrees of drawing closer 
to the Creator. Only the very last degree, at which we presently exist, conceals 
the Creator completely, whereas all of the Higher Degrees only distance Him. 

Although we count ten degrees, there are in fact only five of them. This is 
because six degrees: Hesed, Gevura, Tifferet, Netzah, Hod, and Yesod combine into 
one Sefira, called Z eirAnpin (ZA). ZA itself is sometimes referred to as Tifferet, for 
this Sefira reflects the common attributes of all of its six Sefirot. 

So, there are five degrees of concealment from the Creator down to our 
world: Keter, Hochma, Bina, ZA, and Malchut. Every degree is alternatively called 
Olam (world), from the word Haalamah (concealment). Every degree has its sub- 
degrees, called Partzufim (plural for Partzuf), and every sub-degree has its own 




44 


The Zohar 


sub-degrees, called Sefirot (plural for Sefira). Thus, in all, 5x5x5 = 125 degrees- 
Sefirot exist between us and the Creator. 

Below is a table of the degrees from the Creator down to our world: 

The Creator: an absolutely altruistic desire to create a soul (man) in order 
to fill it with delight. 

The world of Infinity: the existence of souls in the ultimate, perfect state. 


WORLDS 

SEFIROT 

PARTZUFIM 


Keter 

Galgalta 

(*) 

1 st World 

Hochma 

AB 

(*) 

Adam Kadmon 

Bina 

SAG 

(*) 

(AK) 

ZA 

MA 

(*) 


Malchut 

BON 

(*) 


Keter 

Arich Anpin (AA) 

(*) 

2 nd World 

Hochma 

Aba ve Ima (AVI) 

(*) 

Atzilut 

Bina 

Israel Saba ve Tvuna (YESHSUT) 

(*) 

ZA 

MA (ZA and Malchut are called ZON) 

(*) 


Malchut 

BON, Nukva 

(*) 


Keter 

Arich Anpin (AA) 

(*) 

3 rd World 

Hochma 

Aba ve Ima (AVI) 

(*) 

Beria 

Bina 

Israel Saba ve Tvuna (YESHSUT) 

(*) 

ZA 

MA (ZA and Malchut are called ZON) 

(*) 


Malchut 

BON, Nukva 

(*) 


Keter 

Arich Anpin (AA) 

(*) 

4 th World 

Hochma 

Aba ve Ima (AVI) 

(*) 

Yetzira 

Bina 

Israel Saba ve Tvuna (YESHSUT) 

(*) 

ZA 

MA (ZA and Malchut are called ZON) 

(*) 


Malchut 

BON, Nukva 

(*) 


Keter 

Arich Anpin (AA) 

(*) 

5 th World 

Hochma 

Aba ve Ima (AVI) 

(*) 

Assiya 

Bina 

Israel Saba ve Tvuna (YESHSUT) 

(*) 

ZA 

MA (ZA and Malchut are called ZON) 

(*) 


Malchut 

BON, Nukva 

(*) 


Our world: the five egoistic desires felt in the heart. 

(*) - Consists of five Sefirot— Keter, Hochma, Bina, ZA, and Malchut. 
In all, there are 125 degrees from the Creator to our world. 










The Rose 


45 


THE GOAL OF CREATION 

Since there is no notion of time in the spiritual, we already exist in our ultimate, 
perfect state in the world of Infinity (Ein So/). Because desire in the spiritual 
designates action, desire itself acts, without a body. Therefore, when the desire 
to create souls (the will to enjoy) appeared in the Creator, when He wished 
to fill them with the most perfect delight—to sense Him and to delight in His 
perfection—to make creatures just as He is, His desire was immediately realized. 
Thus appeared the World of Ein So/, in which we already exist in our final state. 

However, we still need to attain this state in our sensations. This is 
reminiscent of a sleeping person: even though he is sleeping somewhere, he 
does not understand where he is until he wakes up. However, in order to achieve 
this perfect state, we must go through a gradual process of transformation of our 
inner properties (desires), which corresponds to the spiritual ascension from 
our world through all the worlds, to the World of Ein So/. 

To lead us to the final state, the Creator governs us from Above through 
all the worlds. Thus, there is nothing in our world that does not originate in 
the World of Ein So/, where the final state of every soul determines the path 
that it is destined to travel in general and the changes that it has to undergo 
in particular at every moment (state) of its spiritual advancement towards the 
World of Infinity. 

There is no way back: everything that happens is dictated by the necessity to 
bring every soul to its final state. Only this goal determines the state of our world 
at every second, what happens to it in general and to each of us in particular. The 
Creator created nothing for naught. Rather, everything serves His purpose. 

However, the will that stems from Above does not exclude our active 
participation in our own advancement. Instead of being slaves that move 
under the compulsion of a beating stick called suffering, we can turn our path 
of suffering into the path of Torah—to actively and quickly travel this path 
from below upwards on our own by realizing that the Creator’s purpose is 
indeed desirable. 

This is possible via a request for spiritual elevation—raising MAN, a prayer. 
In response, we will receive spiritual strength from Above that will help us 
improve our qualities, i.e., to ascend. The entire Torah speaks only of this, and 
Kabbalah goes further still and provides a detailed explanation of the path itself. 
As if on a map, it depicts what we go through and where (in what state and at 
which degree) we are now. 




46 


The Zohar 


Kabbalah studies the structure of the spiritual worlds. The purpose of these 
worlds is to weaken the Creator’s signals (desires) so that we could understand 
them with our egoism and realize them with our mind. In Hebrew, the word 
for “world” is O lam (from the word Haalamah— meaning concealment), for 
these worlds conceal and weaken the Creator’s Light to such an extent that 
we can feel it. 

Depending on everyone’s spiritual qualities, on the degree of one’s 
attainment (complete egoism = our world, partial altruism = spiritual worlds), 
we perceive the Creator or His Light differently at each of the 125 degrees. These 
125 degrees amount to just ten, called “the ten Sefirot between the Creator and 
us,” where every lower Sefira transmits less of the Creator’s Light, as perceived 
by those at that degree. The lower the Sefira, the less of the Creator’s Light it lets 
through to those that are below it. 

SEFIROT 

These are the names of the Sefirot: Keter, Hochma, Bina, Hesed, Gevura, Tifferet, 
Netzah, Hod, Yesod, and Malchut. However, six of them are combined into one 
Sefira, called Zeir Anpin, so in all there are five Sefirot: Keter, Hochma, Bina, 
ZA, and Malchut. Also, ZA himself (ZA is usually considered a male Sefira ) is 
sometimes called Tifferet, since Tifferet is his main Sefira, absorbing within itself 
the properties of all six Sefirot of ZA. Thus, the Creator created only five Sefirot: 

Keter—the Creator’s desire to bestow delight upon us, Malchut; 

Hochma—the pleasure itself, which the Creator wishes to bestow upon us; 

Bina— passes the pleasure from Hochma to ZA; 

ZA—accepts the pleasure from Bina and passes it to Malchut; 

Malchut— receives the pleasure. 

Bina consists of two parts: her upper part, called GAR or AVI, is unwilling 
to receive the Light from Hochma. However, since the Creator wishes to impart 
this Light to the lower ones, the lower part of Bina, called ZAT or YESHSUT, 
receives the Light from Hochma and passes it to ZA. ZA does not want to receive 
the Light, but Malchut (to the extent of her correction) evokes ZA to receive 
the Light from Bina and pass it on to her. Hence, we sometimes speak of the 
general reception of the Light by ZA and Malchut, which are together called 
ZON (ZA and Nukva). 

The process is such that Malchut— to the extent that her desires are corrected 
from egoism to altruism—asks ZA to receive the Light “for the Creator’s sake.” 



The Rose 


47 


To this extent, ZA requests the Light from Bina. Subsequently, Bina turns to 
and receives the requested amount of Light from Hochma, then passes it to 
ZA. Malchut (to the extent of her corrected properties) merges with ZA via 
equivalence of form (desires), and receives this Light. 

Keter, Hochma, and GAR of Bina do not want to receive the Light, but 
starting with ZAT of Bina (YESHSUT ), the desire to receive the Light so as to 
pass it to the lower ones appears in the Sefirot. 


Keter 

Galgalta or Metzah - forehead 

"bestowal" 

GE 

Hochma 

Eynaim - eyes 

n ._GAR of Bina 

Nikvey Eynaim - pupils 

Dins 

ZAT of Bina 

Awzen - ear 

AHP 

"reception" 

ZA 

Hotem - nose 

Malchut 

Peh - mouth 


Malchut herself is the creature—the egoistic will to receive pleasure, to enjoy 
the Creator’s Light. This desire is to enjoy the Creator’s Light or the Creator 
(which is the same thing) is the essence of Malchut. We are parts of Malchut. 
However, if we have only egoistic desires, we feel the Creator’s Light as pleasures 
in our world. This is a micro dose of His Light. By correcting our desires 
(properties), we can ascend the spiritual degrees of the Upper Worlds, and there 
experience the Creator’s true delight. 

According to the Thought of Creation, Malchut must receive the Light from 
the four previous Sefirot, and delight in it. Hence, Malchut herself consists of five 
parts: she receives the Light from the preceding Sefirot in four parts, and senses 
it in the fifth. 

All the Sefirot that precede Malchut (excluding Malchut ) are similar to our 
sensory organs, and Malchut is like the heart that receives from all organs: brain, 
sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. The heart is Malchut, and the sensory 
organs are the first nine Sefirot that precede Malchut. All of these parts of Malchut 
are egoistic—they wish to receive the Light (pleasure) so as to enjoy it. With such 
properties, Malchut cannot receive more than a micro dose of the Light of our 
world, sensing the Creator in a manner called “this world.” 











48 


The Zohar 


However, ifMalchut, i.e., every one of us, were to receive desires (aspirations) 
from Above to bestow delight upon the Creator to the same extent that we feel 
the Creator bestowing upon us, with this property (desire), man would ascend 
spiritually to a degree above our world. He would sense the Creator as spiritual 
Light, altruistic pleasure and great knowledge, attainment of supernal thoughts 
and the essence of existence. 

SCREEN 

Malchut (man) can receive the Light only in anti-egoistic desires. If such desires 
appear in Malchut as a result of the realization that egoism is her enemy (with 
the help of Kabbalah), to the extent of her hatred for it, Malchut can repel 
the egoistic pleasures for the sake of spiritual perfection, i.e., similarity to the 
Creator in her desire to please Him and act for His sake. 

This ability to repel selfish reception of pleasure is called “a screen,” and 
the repelled pleasure is called “Returning Light,” and the pleasure that comes to 
Malchut is called “Direct Light.” It is precisely in the repelled pleasure, meaning 
in the desire to bestow whole-heartedly, selflessly, that man can sense the 
Creator’s Light and Supreme Knowledge. 

Since Malchut (man’s egoism) has to repel pleasure from the five parts of her 
egoism, the reflecting screen must also consist of five parts. Hence, it creates five 
parts of the Returning Light. The five parts in Malchut are called by the names 
of the Sefirot from which they receive. The five kinds of Direct Light are called 
NRNHY: Nefesh, Ruach, Neshama, Haya and Yechida. The Light that emanates 
from the Creator descends in the following order: 

Yechida 

Haya 

Neshama 

Ruach 

Nefesh 

PARTZUF 

After Malchut reflects the Light (pleasure), she decides to receive it in order to 
delight the Creator, because He wants Malchut to receive pleasure and feel Him. 
The reflection of all the incoming pleasure is called Rosh (head). The partial 
reception of the Light to the extent of one’s anti-egoistic powers is called Toch 



The Rose 


49 


(interior). The unfulfilled desires (due to the absence of a screen on them) are 
called Sof (end) (see below diagram). 

This is the structure of the soul (Kli, vessel, corrected altruistic desire, Partzuf 
or spiritual body). We call the parts of the spiritual structure by the names of our 
physiological body: head, body, and limbs. There are five parts in the Rosh (head): 
skull— Galgalta, eyes— Eynaim, ears— Awznaim, nose— Hotem, and mouth— Peh. 
There are five parts in the Guf (body) from the mouth—Peh to the navel—' Tabur. In 
the limbs, there are five parts from the navel to the toes (see below diagram). 














































50 


The Zohar 


THE INVERSE PROPORTION BETWEEN THE VESSEL 
AND THE LIGHT 

The more strength Malchut has to oppose egoism, the greater the Light that 
enters her. However, although one works on the correction of the vessel’s coarser 
part, he receives the Light from his efforts in his subtler desires. In other words, 
there is an inverse proportion between the vessel and the Light: the coarser the 
desire ( Kli ) that is corrected, the greater the Light that enters Malchut (vessel); 
however, it enters her Upper Kli (desire). 

Since Malchut (i.e., all that exists apart from the Creator) is absolutely 
egoistic, she can only be corrected by imparting onto herself the properties of 
Bina, the Creator—bestowal without reception. This is the property of absolute 
altruism, of selfless bestowal. To receive such a property (desire) is tantamount 
to ascending from the level of Malchut to the level of Bina. 


SEFIRA 


LIGHT 



Keter 

- 

Hochma 

- 

Bina 

- 

ZA 

- 

Malchut 

- 


If all parts of the Kli can 
receive the Light, then 
all the outside Light 
enters the Sefirot: 


SEFIRA 

LIGHT 

Keter 

Yechida 

Hochma 

Haya 

Bina 

Neshama 

ZA 

Ruach 

Malchut 

Nefesh 


Malchut herself is the will to receive pleasure. The ban imposed on the 
reception of pleasure for oneself is called the First Restriction (Tzimtzum Aleph). 
Restriction is a ban on the reception of pleasure; however, if the receiver aspires 
to please the Creator and not himself, he is allowed to receive the pleasure. 
























The Rose 


51 


Whether Malchut wants it or not, if she (soul, man) has egoistic desires, the 
Light will not enter her (be felt within her). Hence, we are utterly unable to feel 
the spiritual (the Creator). 

THE STATE OF KATNUT (SMALLNESS) 

Yet, Malchut is not the only Sefira that cannot receive the Light: from the world 
of Atzilut and below, Sefirot Bina and ZA cannot receive the Light either. This 
ban is called the Second Restriction (Tzimtzum Bet). In this restriction, Malchut 
seemingly ascends in her desires to Sefira Bina. Her desires of “reception” 
dominate three Sefirot: Bina, ZA, and Malchut, as Sefirot Bina and ZA also fall 
under the rule (desire) of the elevated Malchut. 

If a Partzuf has no strength to oppose its egoistic desires of reception in 
Sefirot Bina, ZA and Malchut (AHP), its lower part is not entitled to receive the 
Creator’s Light, as it will receive it selfishly, thereby causing great harm to itself. 
To avoid this, the upper part of the Partzuf—Sefirot Keter and Hochma (GE)— 
separates from the lower part by Parsa (partition), through which the Light 
cannot pass downwards. Therefore, as a result of Malchut’s ascent to Bina, each 
degree was divided into two parts: 


Keter - Galgalta 


Hochma - Eynaim 


Together called Galgalta 
Eynaim (GE) 

Parsa = elevated Malchut — 


Bina - Awzen 


ZA - Hotem 


Malchut - Peh 


Together called AHP 
(Awzen, Hotem, and Peh) 


Malchut restricted the spreading of Light inside the Partzuf, and two parts 
were formed in her: GE receives the Light, i.e., Sefirot Keter and Hochma receive 
the Lights Nefesh and Ruach, while the other part of the Partzuf (Sefirot Bina, 
ZA, and Malchut) is below the Parsa, and therefore does not receive the Light. 
Their corresponding Lights— Neshama, Haya and Yechida— also remain outside 
of the Partzuf. 










52 


The Zohar 


LIGHT 


SEFIRA 

Yechida 


Haya 

Neshama 

Keter 

Ruach 


GE 

Hochma 

Nefesh 


Bina 

AHP 

ZA 

Malchut 


This degree (Partzuf) is deprived of the Light Neshama-Haya-Yechida and is left 
with just the Light Nefesh-Ruach, called “air.” This is designated by the entry of 
the letter Yod into the word Light ( Ohr = Aleph-Vav-Reish). Thus, the word Light 
(O hr) turns into air (Avir = Aleph-Vav-Yod-Reish). This state of the vessel is called 
Katnut (small state). In other words, the ascent of Malchut to Bina is designated 
by the entry of the letter Yod into the word Light ( Ohr = Aleph-Vav-Reish +Yod = 
Aleph-Vav-Yod-Reish = Avir—air). This means that because of Malchut’s ascent to 
Bina, the Partzuf lost its Light and was left with air. 

In such a state, the degree or Partzuf is called Katnut (smallness), where 
Sefirot Keter and Hochma have only the Light Nefesh-Ruach, as Sefirot Bina, ZA and 
Malchut are below the Parsa, and do not receive the Light. The Parsa prevents 
the Light from spreading below it. Sefirot Keter-Hochma and Bina-ZA-Malchut are 
designated by the following letters: 
























The Rose 


53 


In the reverse order, these letters form the Creator’s name Elokim, where 
GE = letters Mem + Yod = IM (pronounced as Ml), and AHP = letters Aleph + 
Lamed + Hey = ELEH. Since man attains the Creator from below upwards, the 
Creator’s name ELOKIM is read from below upwards. 

After the birth of all the worlds and the descent of the entire Creation to 
our world, all the Partzufim of the world of Atzilut and the worlds of BYA passed 
into the state of Katnut. Thus, the Light is present in GE, but absent in AHP. 
AHP of the Upper Degree fell into GE of the lower degree, thus forming the 
spiritual ladder between the Creator and man in our world, and the lowest part 
of the last spiritual degree of the world of Assiya fell into a point in man’s heart. 
Consequently, all the intermediate degrees now exist one inside the other: AHP 
of the Upper Degree is inside GE of the lower one: 


THE CREATOR 


The descent of the Light from the Creator down to man in our world 


X 


THE WORLD OF AK 


The head of AA ("unattainable") is considered Infinity 


K 

H 

B 

ZA 

M 



K 

_H_ 

B 

ZA 

M 


The world of Atzilut = GE and AHP fell into the world of Beria 


The world of Beria = GE and AHP of the world of Atzilut 


}' _ 

H 


The world of Yetzira = GE and AHP of the world of Beria 


B, 

1 





ZA 


V 


The world of Assiya = GE and AHP of the world of Yetzira 


M 


H 






B, 






7A 


Our world = man's point in the heart, 




M 


which contains AHP of the world of Assiya 


The sum of man’s desires is referred to as his heart. Since the nature with 
which we are born is absolute egoism, man does not feel the spiritual point 
in his heart. However, at some point in one of his reincarnations, man begins 
to gradually strive towards attainment of the causes of life, its evaluation; he 


























54 


The Zohar 


yearns to attain himself, his source, just as you do right now. Man’s aspiration 
to the Creator is precisely this aspiration to attain his origin. Man’s discontent 
in life often helps him in this search, when there’s nothing that appeals to him 
in his surroundings. Such circumstances are sent from Above in order for man 
to start feeling an empty point in his heart, and to stimulate in him the desire 
to fulfill it. 

The Creator manifests as the altruistic property to bestow pleasure without 
any benefit for Himself. From this, we can understand the property of Sefirot 
Keter, Hochma, and Bina that share the Creator’s property of bestowal. The only 
Creation is Malchut, the will to receive the Light (pleasure). All of us and our 
entire world are the lowest part of this egoistic Malchut. 

THE STATE OF QADLUT (GREATNESS/ADULTHOOD) 

However, if one ( Malchut ) raises MAN, the request for his spiritual ascent, by 
making efforts to free himself from egoism and by praying to the Creator for 
help, the Light AB-SAG descends from Above. It comes from the world of AK, 
brings Malchut altruistic strength and enables her to return from Bina back to 
her place. In other words, Malchut’s ability to refrain from selfish reception of 
pleasure is complemented with the strength to receive pleasure for the Creator’s 
sake, to receive the Light of Hochma within AHP, for His sake. 

Subsequently, AHP, or Sefirot Bina, ZA and Malchut, become reactivated, the 
Partzuf regains all five Kelim (parts), the letter Yod disappears from the word Avir 
(air), and it turns to being Ohr (Light). In that state, all five Lights NRNHY fill 
the Partzuf, the letters MI join the letters ELEH, forming the Creator’s name— 
Elokim. This state is called Gadlut (greatness/adulthood). 

ASCENT OF THE LOWER ONE TO THE UPPER ONE 

As a result of Malchut’s ascent to Bina, the Upper Partzuf establishes contact with 
the lower one. As a result, the lower Partzuf can ascend to the level of the Upper 
One. This is the reason for the second restriction: to give the lower ones (man) 
the opportunity to ascend to the World of Infinity, up to the Creator Himself. 

In order to establish this contact, the Upper Partzuf deliberately diminishes 
itself, descends to the level of the lower Partzuf, and becomes similar to the lower 
one in its properties. AHP of the Upper Partzuf willingly falls into GE of the 
lower one, as though it has no strength to receive the Light, and they become 
a single whole. This is similar to a scenario when a strong individual joins a 
society of criminals, imitating their behavior, so that after being admitted into 



The Rose 


55 


their circle and establishing contact with them, he will gradually influence and 
correct them. 

How? The Upper Light (die so-called Light of AB-SAG) comes and provides 
AHP of die Upper Partzuf with die strength to ascend to their GE. And GE of die 
lower Partzuf ascend together with them: because they were a single whole and 
equivalent in their properties below, they receive die same strength to ascend. 

Upon receiving die Light of AB-SAG, GE of the lower Partzuf become 
like Upper One. Therefore, we should not regard the second restriction as 
negative, but as help from the Upper Partzuf. It descends to the lower Partzuf by 
corrupting its own properties in order to equalize itself with the lower one, so as 
to subsequently ascend together with it to its previous level. This way, the lowest 
degree can ascend not only to the next Higher One, but also to the Highest 
Degree of the spiritual ladder. 

THE LIGHT OF ZON IS THE LIGHT OF THE WORLDS BYA 

Partzuf YESHSUT is AHP of Partzuf Bina of the world of Atzilut, and all that it 
receives and passes to ZON of the world of Atzilut subsequently descends to the 
worlds of BYA and then to us. 

In the small state (Katnut), AHP of YESHSUT falls into ZON. Then 
YESHSUT receives strength, and by elevating its AHP, it elevates ZON, too. 
By ascending to YESHSUT, ZON become similar to it and receive the Light 
at the level of YESHSUT. ZON can never receive the Light of Hochma in their 
own level; they can only receive the Light of Hassadim, the Light essential to 
their existence. 

ZON of the world of Atzilut are called O lam (world), just as our world is also 
called O lam, for all that ZON de Atzilut receive can be received by man in this 
world. And vice versa—all that ZON de Atzilut cannot receive is unattainable to 
man, for we attain only up to the level of ZON, and not higher. 

And since ZON cannot receive the Light of Hochma in their place, the 
Creator purposely initiated the second restriction, thereby lowering the Sefirot 
of AHP of Partzuf YESHSUT down to ZON, so that ZON would be able to 
ascend to YESHSUT and higher, up to the Highest Degree. Hence, it is said 
in the Torah (Beresheet Barah): “In the beginning the Creator created all in 
judgment (restriction), but after seeing that the world (ZON) cannot exist 
(receive all of the Light of Hochma prepared for it), added to judgment the 
property of mercy.” 



56 


The Zohar 


In the beginning, He elevated Malchut (the restriction of YESHSUT, for 
Malchut is restricted from receiving Light) to Bina (mercy of YESHSUT). As a 
result, AHP of YESHSUT fell into ZON and merged with them. However, the 
world (ZON) still cannot exist in this way. Hence, the Creator added mercy to 
judgment: He gave YESHSUT the strength to elevate its AHP together with ZON 
to the degree of YESHSUT. There, ZON receive the Light of YESHSUT and pass 
it down to all the worlds of BYA and to our world. 

CORRECTION IN THREE LINES 

Each of the ten Sefirot in turn consists of ten individual sub-Se/irot. Malchut 
ascends to Bina in each individual Sefira, i.e., to the full height of the ten 
Sefirot ; in each particular Sefira, Malchut moves up from its place to the place 
of Bina in that Sefira: 


(M - ZA -1 B - H - K) - K 

(M - ZA -1 B - H - K) - H 

(M - ZA -1 B - H - K) - B 

(M - ZA -1 B - H - K) - ZA 

(M - ZA -1 B - H - K) - M 

The sign | signifies a particular Parsa in a Sefira, the restriction imposed on 
the spreading of Light. GE that remain in each Sefira above the Parsa are called 
the “right line,” for there is Light in them. Malchut that ascends to Bina in each 
Sefira creates the “left line” with her restriction on the reception of Light. A 
Zivug made on the elevated Malchut (only on the free, unrestricted Kelim KHB ) 
allows the Light of Hassadim to shine in GE, and this reception of the Light of 
Hassadim in GE is called the “middle line.” 

Now let us clarify what is written in The Zohar: There are ten Sefirot: Keter 
(K), Hochma (H), Bina (B), Hesed (H), Gevura (G), T ifferet (T), Netzah (N), Hod 
(H), Yesod (Y), and Malchut (M). However, there are actually only five of them: 
Keter (K ), Hochma (H), Bina (B), Tifferet (T), and Malchut (M). This is because 
Tifferet (alternatively called Zeir Anpin— ZA) consists of six Sefirot, from Hesed to 
Yesod. Five Sefirot KHB- ZA-M created five Partzufim in each world. In the world 
of Atzilut, these Partzufim are Arich Anpin (AA), Aha ve Ima (AVI), and Zeir Anpin 
and Nukva (ZON). Keter is called AA; correspondingly, Hochma and Bina are 
called AVI; and ZA (Tifferet) and Malchut are called ZON. 

The essence of the seven days of creation lies in Partzufim ZA and Nukva of 
the world of Atzilut, which consist of seven Sefirot: HGT-NHYM. And from the 


The Rose 


57 


description of creation it transpires how AVI ( Hochma and Bina) beget ZON (all 
of creation, including us) and elevate them to their final state during the 6,000 
years. This is what The Book of Zohar tells us. 

Rabbi Hizkiyah began his explanation of Nukva of the world of Atzilut 
by clarifying the birth of ZON from Ima (Bina), called Elokim. That is why he 
began his explanation with a rose, Nukva of ZA. At the utmost completion of 
its development, Nukva of ZA is called Knesset Israel, the Assembly of Israel. 
For Nukva consists of all the souls called Israel; hence, it is said that a rose is 
Knesset Israel. 

There are two states in a rose (Malchut). The lowest, initial, small state 
(Katnut) is when Malchut consists only of Sefira Keter filled with the Light 
Nefesh, while her other nine Sefirot are those that fell from the world of Atzilut 
to the world of Beria. The other state of Nukva is mature, big, complete 
(Gadlut), when her nine Sefirot ascend from the world of Beria back to the 
world of Atzilut, and complete the full ten Sefirot of her Partzuf. Then, being 
equal to her husband, Malchut ascends together with him to AVI and clothes 
them, i.e., receives their Light. 

The clothing of the lower, outer Partzuf onto the Upper, Inner One means 
that the lower Partzuf attains a part of the Upper One, ascends to a Higher 
spiritual level, and becomes in some way similar to the Upper Partzuf. 

In that state, ZA is called Israel, from the letters LI (to me) and ROSH 
(head), which signifies the state of Gadlut, while Nukva is called “the Assembly 
of Israel,” for she accumulates all of the Light of her husband, ZA, and passes it 
to the lower ones—the souls in the worlds BYA. 

Nukva’s state of Katnut is called “a rose among thorns,” for nine of her lower 
Sefirot in the Katnut state fell under the Parsa of the world of Atzilut, thereby 
losing the Light of the world of Atzilut, and becoming as dry as thorns. And in 
her Gadlut state, Nukva is simply called “a rose” or “the Assembly of Israel.” This 
is why it is written, “there is a rose, and there is a rose.” 

The color red designates the rose’s connection with the outer, impure forces, 
which, because of this connection, can suck the strength (Light) from it. This is 
because nine of her Sefirot are in exile below the world of Atzilut, in the world 
of Beria, which may already contain impure forces. And the rose also has a color 
white in its Sefira Keter, for her Sefira Keter is in the world of Atzilut, above the 
Parsa, where there is no contact with the lower, impure forces. In other words, 
there are two opposite states: perfection and its absence, Light and darkness. 
They are felt by him who merits it. 



58 


The Zohar 


It is therefore written that just as a rose among thorns is tinged with red 
and white, so does the Assembly of Israel consist of judgment and mercy. This 
shows that in Gadlut, when Malchut is called Knesset Israel, even though she 
ascended to Bina and clothed her, she still retains the property of judgment, of 
restriction—an attitude that’s tough and just, rather than compassionate. This 
is so because she needs a screen (a force of resistance to her egoistic desires), 
which, if available, enables Malchut to receive the Upper Light. 

The law, judgment, or restriction does not allow for the reception of Light 
in egoistic desires. The screen, the aspiration to oppose one’s egoistic desires, 
repels the Upper Light (pleasure) back to its source, the Creator. The Light that 
man sends back is called “Returning Light” or the “Light of Judgment.” To 
the extent of the intensity of the reflective force (i.e., the force of resistance to 
one’s will to receive), man is allowed to receive the ten Sefirot of the Upper Light 
(called the Direct Light or the Light of Mercy) for the Creator’s sake, in precisely 
these altruistic desires. And that is why, even in its complete state, the Assembly 
of Israel consists of judgment and mercy, which corresponds to the red and 
white colors of a rose among thorns. 

And this is the pool made by King Shlomo (Solomon). It is built on twelve 
bulls, for the nine lower Sefirot of Malchut that fell to the world of Beria were 
corrected there from twelve heads of bulls. One of their Sefirot, Keter, which 
remained in the world of Atzilut, is called the “pool” that is built on these bulls. 
Together, they are called thirteen rose petals. (The reason why the ten Sefirot of 
Malchut are divided by ten -Hassadim or thirteen-Hochma will be clarified later). 

The Light of a complete Nukva is called Hochma, as it contains the Light of 
Wisdom, and originates from the thirteen names called “the thirteen attributes 
of mercy.” However, the main thing that Rabbi Hizkiyah wants to tell us is that 
a rose among thorns is above the Assembly of Israel, because, as is well known, 
all that is present in Nukva’s complete state must exist in her small state as well, 
albeit in diminished similarity. 

Therefore, it is said that the properties of white and red in the small state 
correspond to the properties of mercy and judgment in the big state. And the 
thirteen petals of the small state, when corrected, create in Nukva the thirteen 
attributes of mercy in her big state. Later on, we will see how these thirteen 
attributes of Malchut of the world of Atzilut change her in both the small and 
big states. 

It is written that, in the process of creation, “in the beginning Elokim (Bina 
de Atzilut ) created” Nukva of ZA with thirteen words: ET, SHAMA1M, VE’ET, 



The Rose 


59 


ARETZ, VEARETZ, HAITA, TO HU, VABOHU, VECHOSHECH, AL, PNEI, 
TEHOM, VERUACH (from the word Elokim to the word Elokim). And these 
thirteen words signify the thirteen petals of a rose among thorns (her small 
state), like the pool built by the King Shlomo, which stands on thirteen (twelve) 
bulls (nine lower Sefirot of Malchut without Light, as they are in the world of 
Beria, below the Parsa of the world of A tzilut). These words are the preparation 
for the purification and correction of the Assembly of Israel in order to receive 
the thirteen attributes of mercy. 

These thirteen attributes of mercy (the Light of a complete Nukva) surround 
her and shine upon her from all sides, and guard her from the touch of foreign 
(egoistic) desires. After all, until she is filled with all the Light of Elochma in her 
complete, big state, there’s a potential for foreign, egoistic desires to cling to and 
feed off her. 

2. Afterwards, the name Elokim is mentioned once more, “Elokim soars.” 
Why is it mentioned in this sense? So as to bring out the five rigid leaves that 
surround the rose, which are called “salvation.” And these are the five gates. 
And it is said of this secret, I will raise the “cup of salvation” (Psalms, 116:13). 
It is the cup of blessing. The cup of blessing must rest on five fingers, just as a 
rose rests on five rigid leaves that correspond to the five fingers. And this rose is 
the cup of blessing, from the second to the third mention of the name Elokim 
(Beresheet , 1:2-3), there are five words: “soars,” “over,” “the surface,” “of the 
waters,” “and said”—in all, five words parallel the five leaves. And further, 
“The Creator said, ‘Let there be Light’”—this Light was created. However, it 
was concealed and enclosed within that covenant that entered the rose and 
fructified it. And it is referred to as “A fructiferous tree, wherein is the seed 
thereof” ( Beresheet , 1:12). And this seed exists in the mark of the covenant. 

The five leaves are the five Sefirot of the Light reflected from Malchut, which 
she raises from the Z ivug de Hakaa. The direct incoming Light is called five 
Elassadim HGT-NH, and it clothes into five parts (types of restrictions) of the 
Returning Light HGT-NH, called the five rigid leaves of a rose, which correspond 
to the text from the second (the spirit of God soared over the waters) to the third 
(and said) mention of the word Elokim in the Torah. 

These words explain how the five rigid leaves (attributes) can be extracted 
from Malchut so that she will be fit for a Z ivug and achieve the big state. And 
during the big state, when the five rigid leaves become five restrictions, they 
are defined as the five gates of reception of the Light of Elassadim of the Direct 
Light, and they are called salvation, and Malchut is called the cup of salvation or 



60 


The Zohar 


the cup of blessing and good fortune, for, thanks to these leaves (restrictions), 
Malchut can receive the Light of Hassadim— a blessing. 

The cup of blessing must rest on five fingers, for Malchut can receive the Light 
of Hochma only if she is clothed in the Light of Hassadim beforehand. Therefore, 
first she has to make a blessing, which means to receive the five parts ( NRNHY) 
of the Light of Hassadim with the help of five fingers (five restrictions), and only 
then to receive in them (i.e., in the corrected intentions) the Light of Hochma. 

Hence, a cup of wine must be raised with two hands, as five fingers of 
the right hand symbolize mercy —Hassadim, and five fingers of the left hand 
symbolize restrictions. However, having started the blessing, the cup must only 
be held with the five fingers of the right hand ( Hassadim , bestowing). Otherwise, 
the impure forces that take from the left (receiving) side become active, as such 
forces cling only to a place where there is reception of Light. 

What follows is the big state of Malchut, which corresponds to the words 
of the Torah: “Let there be Light.” These are the five lights, in which Adam 
saw the world from end to end, as it is written in the Talmud ( Hagigah , 12). 
But the Creator saw that there would be transgressions in the generations of 
the Flood and the Tower of Babel, and concealed this Light. And the following 
generations will then need to attain it on their own. 

Previously, these five Hassadim were in Yesod of Z A, and Malchut received 
from it, and not from Bina, called Elokim, as she does now. Yesod de ZA is 
called the mark of the covenant with the Creator (after the corrections, called 
circumcision, are made), and five Hassadim received on the five restrictions are 
called “seed.” The main force of restrictions and the impact forces of the screen, 
with which it repels the Light, are in Ateret Yesod (the end of the Sefira Yesod). 
There occurs Zivug de Hakaa, from which Malchut receives the Light. Only at the 
end of correction will this Zivug pass on to Malchut herself. 

Therefore, during the 6,000 years, the screen that is in Yesod, strikes at 
the incoming Light (pleasure) with its five restrictions (the forces that oppose 
egoistic reception of pleasure), thus creating five parts of the Returning Light, 
and receiving in them the five parts of the Light of Hassadim. Subsequently, 
ZA passes these five Lights of Hassadim from his Yesod to Nukva. And these five 
Lights of Hassadim are called “seed.” 

3. Just as the covenant is conceived from that seed in forty-two Zivugim, 
so the secret name fills and inseminates all forty-two letters of the initial 
act of creation. 



The Rose 


61 


The name “forty-two” = MB = Mem + Bet = 40 + 2 is composed of HaVaYaH 
(four letters), filled HaVaYaH (ten letters), and doubly filled HaVaYaH (twenty- 
eight letters). In all, 4 + 10 + 28 = 42, signifying the seed that exists in the mark 
of the covenant that is enclosed in five Hassadim and five Gevurot. 

There are two aspects to Nukva: her body (Partzuf), which emerges from Bina, 
and her Zivug, called the secret of unity with ZA. Nukva can be in two states: 
small or big ( Katnut or Gadlut respectively). The small state is an incomplete, 
insufficient state of Malchut, but it is necessary as preparation for the big state, 
called the revelation of the secret, of the concealed. 

And since the big state reveals the small, and all that is concealed in the 
small state becomes clear in the big, he who is in a state of spiritual descent does 
not see the reasons for his state, but it all becomes clear to him when he attains 
the big state that follows. 

As a result of the ascent of Malchut of AVI to their Bina, Partzuf of Bina (AVI) 
was divided into two parts: the upper part, GE, acquired the name AVI, while 
the lower part, AHP, became known as YESHSUT. AVI are filled with the Light 
of Hassadim, since they wish for no other, and YESHSUT receives it from them, 
for, although it desires the Light of Hochma, it cannot receive it in view of the 
fact that Malchut of AVI ascended above it. 

However, although there is no Light of Hochma in AVI, they do not suffer 
without it whatsoever, and therefore exist in perfection called GAR, even in the 
absence of the Light of Hochma. And even when one raises MAN requesting 
strength (i.e., the Light of Hochma) so as to overcome his impure desires, AVI 
do not receive the Light of Hochma. YESHSUT receives this Light and passes it 
to ZA. Hence, although AVI are below the Rosh of AA, and there is no Light of 
Hochma in them, they do not suffer from it. 

However, YESHSUT suffers from the absence of the Light of Hochma, 
wishing to pass it to ZA, so it waits for MAN from ZA in order to ascend to AVI 
in the form of Sefira Daat. For when the lower ones raise MAN, the whole of 
Bina ascends to the Rosh of AA; YESHSUT receives the Light of Hochma from 
AA and passes it to ZON. This corresponds to the disappearance of the letter Yod 
from the word Avir (air), and Avir turns into Ohr— Light ( Hochma) once more. 

However, for all that, even in the Rosh of AA, AVI remain only with the Light 
of Hassadim (air). Hence, the heads of both AA and AVI are called “Supreme 
Waters” or “Heaven.” This is considering the fact that AVI can be beneath the 
Rosh of AA; however, since it does not affect their independence and perfection, 
it is as if they are in the Rosh of AA. 



62 


The Zohar 


Under AVI there is a firmament ( Parsa ) of the world of Atzilut, which 
separates the Kelim of bestowal from the Kelim of reception of the world of 
Atzilut. YESHSUT and ZON (inferior waters) that need the Light of Hochma 
stand below the Parsa, which is in the chest of AA. It is therefore said that 
the inferior waters weep (i.e., their state is small), for they feel the lack of Ohr 
Hochma and wish to ascend to the Rosh of AA. In no way should one confuse 
the Parsa of the world of Atzilut (located within the world of Atzilut) that divides 
it into GE and AHP with the Parsa below the world Atzilut that separates it from 
the worlds of BYA. 

The Light that is received above the Parsa of the world of Atzilut is called the 
Light of Mem-Bet (MB). However, the seven Sefirot of ZON (six Sefirot of ZA and 
one Sefira of Malchut) that designate the seven days of creation cannot receive 
this Light of MB, as they are located below the Parsa and receive only the Light 
of Hassadim (minimal sustenance) from YESHSUT. 

However, when the lower ones (man) raise MAN, and MAD descends from 
AB-SAG (the Light that brings Bina back to the Rosh of AA), YESHSUT receives 
the Light of Hochma and passes it to ZON, allowing ZON to ascend above the 
Parsa that stands in the Chazeh (chest) of AA, and receive the Light of MB. 

That is why the Light of MB in ZON is manifested in thirty-two Elokim and 
ten sayings, where thirty-two Elokim represent YESHSUT in the state of ascent, 
when YESHSUT receives thirty-two streams of wisdom (Hochma) that create in 
it the thirty-two names of Elokim, mentioned in the act of creation: “In the 
beginning the Creator created,” and so on. 

The ten sayings are five Hassadim. After ZON have already received the 
Light of Hochma from thirty-two Elokim, the five Lights of Hassadim that were 
received from AVI (signifying MB) are called “Supreme Waters.” We see that the 
five Hassadim in ZON do not turn into the name MB before they receive from 
thirty-two Elokim. It is therefore said that thirty-two Elokim and ten sayings form 
the name MB, i.e., in the state of ascent. 

Hence, Rabbi Hizkiyah said that the five Lights in the saying “Let there be 
Light” (signifying the five Hassadim) are called “seed” (abundance), which Yesod 
of ZA passes to Malchut. And it is called MB, although essentially it is merely 
five Hassadim ; however, since it has the Light of Hochma that was received from 
thirty-two Elokim of YESHSUT, it refers to MB. 



Flower Buds 


4. In the Beginning, Rabbi Shimon opened, “The flower buds have appeared 
on the earth” (In Hebrew the words “land” and “earth” are designated by the 
same word, Eretz ; Song of Songs, 2:12). “The flower buds” refer to the act of 
creation; “appeared on the earth.” When? On the third day, as it is said, “And 
the earth brought forth grass” ( Beresheet , 1:12). “The time of singing has 
come” refers to the fourth day, the time of strictness, judgment, restriction. 
Therefore, on the fourth day, the word “lights” is written with a missing letter, 
which hints at the strictness of judgment and a curse. “And the voice of the 
turtle dove is heard” refers to the fifth day, on which it is said, “Let the waters 
swarm,” so that they can produce offspring. However, the words “is heard” 
already refer to the sixth day, on which it is said, “Let us make man,” who, 
in the future, shall put action before understanding (we shall do and we shall 
hear, N aaseh ve Nishmah ). For here it is said, “Let us make man,” and there 
it is said, “We shall do and we shall hear.” “In our land” refers to the day of 
Shabbat, which is like the Land of Life, the world to come. 

It is completely incomprehensible to us how The Zohar compares the words 
from Shir HaShirim (Song of Songs, 2:12) with what is written in the Torah about 
the first days of creation. The six days of creation symbolize the six Sefirot HGT- 
NHY of ZA, onto which all ten Sefirot of Nukva are built. This is because Nukva 
is only the will to receive (pleasure), while her entire spiritual body (desires of 
bestowal) consists of her husband’s Sefirot, ZA, the altruistic properties that ZA 
passes to Nukva. 

Nukva herself (the created desire to receive pleasure) is an empty place 
unfilled with Light (the Creator). This is because the Light can only enter a 
desire ( Kli ) with similar properties to itself. Therefore, to the extent of her 
similarity to ZA, the properties that Malchut receives from ZA, those corrected 
properties of Malchut turn into a Partzuf and become filled with the Light that 
corresponds to their correction. 


63 



64 


The Zohar 


Thus, the greater the correction that is made in a particular part, the greater 
the Light (of the five Lights NRNHY) that enters that part. The corrected and 
fulfilled part of Malchut is referred to as a “world.” Here and henceforth, The 
Zohar explains how Nukva is built out of ZA, i.e., how the world is created. 

Nukva is called “earth.” Flower buds are Sefirot— the properties of ZA 
that appear and grow within Malchut on the third day of creation, which 
corresponds to Sefira Tifferet {Hesed-l, Gevura-2, TifferetA). In the beginning, 
Malchut was created as ZA in height; two equally great celestial bodies, the 
Sun—ZA and the Moon—Malchut. This is why we see them as being equal in 
size when the Moon is full. After all, all that is said with regard to man. In the 
initial state following her creation, Malchut is a point at the feet of ZA, and 
subsequently grows along him. 

That is to say, on the third day of creation, Malchut was equal in height 
(had the same properties) to Tifferet of ZA. However, Malchut was not able to 
receive the Light in such a state. Hence, it is said, STRICTNESS (judgment) 
APPEARED ON THE EARTH (in Malchut); the flower buds merely appeared. 

And after that, THE TIME OF SINGING HAS COME already refers to the 
fourth day of creation, when Malchut was diminished, because she complained 
to the Creator: “Two angels cannot wear one crown”—if Malchut is equal to ZA 
in height, she cannot receive the Light of Hochma from him. 

The reason for that being—not having received the Light of Hassadim from 
ZA beforehand, Malchut cannot receive the Light of Hochma, as the Light of 
Hochma can only be received within the Light of Hassadim, by clothing the Light 
of Hochma (pleasure) into the Light of Hassadim (the intention to enjoy “for the 
Creator’s sake”). 

And the Creator answered Malchut: “Go and diminish yourself.” In other 
words: if, owing to your egoistic properties, you cannot receive the Light 
independently, but only from ZA, then diminish your own properties, accept 
His, and gradually correct yourself. Then you will be able to receive all of the 
Light and be like Him (ZA—the Creator). All of this is described in the Talmud 
(Hullin, 60:2), but only with the explanation provided in The Zohar do we stop 
perceiving it as a fairytale. 

Then Malchut descended below Yesod of ZA, and her nine lower Sefirot 
fell below Parsa into the worlds of BYA. And only her Sefira Keter remained 
in Atzilut as a point standing below Yesod of ZA. And from here on, Malchut 
is built not of her own Sefirot (properties) that exist in BYA, but of Sefirot 
(properties) Netzah and Hod of ZA. 



Flower Buds 


65 


Although Malchut was previously bigger, she was not able to receive the 
Light for lack of the Light of Hassadim; now she will be smaller, but she will 
have the Light of Hassadim, in which she will be able to receive the Light of 
Hochma. Even though Malchut will be at a lower degree, she will be able to utilize 
it, for die Light of Hassadim repels the impure forces that cling to Nukva. That 
is die meaning of the word Zamir (singing/pruning). However, there is another 
meaning to this word that is at use here—cutting off, or pruning die impure 
forces from Malchut (rose bud). 

THE VOICE OF THE TURTLE DOVE: The turtle dove is a Sefira, the 
property of Netzah de ZA, and the voice of the turtle dove represents Sefira Hod 
of ZA, the fifth day of creation. And since Malchut receives from Yesod (which 
receives from Hod that is joined with Netzah), such reception by Malchut is 
referred to as “the voice of the turtle dove.” 

Therefore, the words “is heard” refer to the sixth day, since the voice of the 
turtle dove ( Malchut ) is heard only with the help of the sixth day, Yesod of ZA, 
which includes both Netzah and Hod, and passes their Light to Malchut. Hence, 
it is said that this voice is heard in Malchut only from Yesod, on the sixth day. 

The reason for this is that Malchut can receive the Light only from the 
middle line of ZA: either from Yesod of ZA (she receives the degree called NHY, 
Ihur - embryo) or from Tifferet of ZA (she receives the degree called HGT = VAK, 
Yenika - nursing or Katnut - smallness) or from Daat of ZA (she receives the 
degree called HBD = GAR, Mochin - brain or Gadlut - big). 


Left 

| 

LINES 

Middle 

| 

Right 

| 

NAME 

OF DEGREE 

THE LIGHT 

IN THE DEGREE 

( Bina 

\[ 

i 

i / 

Daat 

Hochma) 

1 1 
i 

HBD ( HaBaD) 

The Light of Neshama 
= The light of HBD 

(Gevura 

j 

j ( 

Tifferet 

Hesed) 

HGT (HaGaT) 

The Light of Ruach 
= The light of HGT 

f Hod 

i 

HH 

Yesod 

Netzah) 

j 

NHY (NellY) 

The Light of Nefesh 
= The light of NHY 















66 


The Zohar 


LET US MAKE MAN, FOR IN THE FUTURE HE SHALL PUT ACTION 
BEFORE LISTENING: sight refers to Sefira Hochma, hearing refers to Sefira 
Bina. Action or deed is a property of Malchut. In order to correct Malchut, the 
Creator’s only creation (other Sefirot are properties of the Creator Himself, with 
which He gradually created Malchut), a second restriction was made—Malchut 
ascended to Bina so as to combine her egoistic properties of reception with 
Bina’ s altruistic properties of bestowal; Malchut ascended to Aba-Hochma, and 
Ima-Bina found herself below Malchut (Parsa ), where she became similar in her 
properties to Malchut. 

Eyes refer to Sefira Hochma or Aba. Malchut ascended to the level of eyes and 
stands at the level of pupils. Malchut is called Nukva; and Malchut that stands 
at the level of eyes is called Nikvey Eynaim (pupils) or NE. That is why there are 
only Keter and Hochma in the Rosh (head) of AA: Bina fell from the Rosh to the 
Guf (body) and Malchut is above Bina, that is, Malchut represents an action that 
is Above, i.e., precedes perception and understanding. This is what is meant 
by “we will do, and we will hear”—the act of the second restriction, limiting 
reception only to GE. Such a state is called the “return” (in one’s properties to 
the Creator). The “complete return” occurs when AHP of Malchut gets corrected 
and joins GE at this degree. 

As a result of Malchut’s ascent to NE, she changes her properties (every one 
of us needs only this—to ascend to the level of the Creator’s properties, so that 
we can receive them and become like Him), and is now ready to ascend to AVI 
and receive the Light of Haya. The constant Light of this level is called the First 
Temple. That is why when receiving the Torah, Israel elected to act first and hear 
after. And for this reason they merited reception of the Torah (Talmud, Shabbat, 
85:1), as the action ( Malchut ) ascended and clothed AVI, and thus the secret of 
the fifty gates of Bina was revealed. 

Construction of the Temple does not pertain to it being built in this world, 
but rather to the attainment of the degree of the Temple, the degree of AVI 
de Atzilut, the Light of Haya (the First Temple) or the degree of YESHSUT de 
Atzilut, the Light of Neshama (the Second Temple). 

Here The Zohar tells us: “it is heard” on the sixth day, for on this day (in this 
state) Malchut was corrected by means of her ascent above Bina, referred to as 
“placing action before listening,” to do and to hear as during the reception of 
the Torah. Malchut in the state of ascension to Bina is called the Eternal Land or 
the Land of Life, for she inherits life from Bina. 




Flower Buds 


67 


“IN OUR LAND” REFERS TO SHABBAT, WHICH IS LIKE THE 
ETERNAL LAND OF LIFE: Ima-Bina is called die Land of Life or die Eternal 
Land. As a result of the act on the sixth day, meaning the Creator’s action from 
Above (the factor of time is designated by an action of the Creator Himself, 
which has no causes in our world), Malchut ascended to Ima on the seventh day 
of creation (Shabbat) and became like Ima, for when the lower one ascends to 
the degree of the Upper One, they become equal (in properties). Hence, upon 
ascending to Bina and there receiving the Light of Haya, Malchut is called the 
Land of Eternal Life. 

5. Another explanation: flower buds are the Patriarchs, who entered the mind 
and entered into the world to come, Bina, where they remain concealed. 
From there they emerge in concealment and conceal themselves in the true 
prophets. Yosef was born and they concealed themselves within him. When 
Yosef entered the Holy Land, he erected them there, and then “they appeared 
on the earth” and were revealed there. When did they appear? When a rainbow 
can be seen, they become revealed. At that moment, “the time of singing has 
come,” meaning the time to eradicate all the wicked in the world. Why did 
they survive? Because the flower buds have appeared on (from) the earth. And 
if they were to be seen beforehand, they could not have remained in the 
world, and the world would not have been able to exist. 

\ 


\ 


> Three Sons 


Three Patriarchs 












68 


The Zohar 


Here The Zohar explains the attainment of the Light of Haya by ZA. NHY of 
ZA are called “sons” and HGT of ZA are called “patriarchs,” as well as the “turtle 
dove.” ZA himself (seemingly) consists of two parts: above his Chazeh, his Sefirot 
HGT are called the big ZON; below his Chazeh, Sefirot NHY are called the small 
ZON. Sefirot HGT correspond to Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov, while NHY 
correspond to Moshe, Aaron and Yosef. Malchut corresponds to King David. 

Sefirot NHY are called “prophets,” and Yesod is called “the righteous one.” 
Here The Zohar speaks of the buds that gradually grow from the small state 
to the big state of ZON: first ZON were small, consisting of Sefirot NHY with 
the Light of Nefesh and called Ubar (embryo). Then, with the help of Yenika 
(nursing), i.e., receiving Light from Ima, ZON grew. Accordingly, the properties 
of Sefirot NHY grew to equalize those of Sefirot HGT, and Sefirot NHY received 
the Light of Ruach. 

Thus, the Partzuf now consists of parts of HGT and NHY with the Lights 
Ruach and Nefesh. Subsequently, by further reception of strength from the Upper 
One, and further growth, they’ve attained the state of Gadlut Aleph, the first big 
state. Accordingly, Sefirot HGT became HBD with the Light of Neshama, Sefirot 
NHY became Sefirot HGT, and received new Sefirot NHY. 

Thus, the Partzuf grew to include three parts: HBD, HGT, and NHY with the 
Lights Nefesh, Ruach, and Neshama. And it is called Gadol (big—the first big state). 
Then, through further growth, they’ve attainted the state of maturity (Gadlut 
Bet, the second big state), and the Light of Haya entered Sefirot HBD. 



1. Embryo 


2. Small 


3. Big 


















Flower Buds 


69 


The word “growth” refers to the growth of a screen, of man’s inner anti- 
egoistic forces and desires. This is the only difference between a big vessel and 
a small one, the only difference between the Partzufim. Their inner properties 
change depending on the change in the magnitude of the screen. 

THESE FATHERS ENTERED THE SUPERNAL MIND AND 
ASCENDED INTO THE WORLD TO COME: this sentence speaks of the 
prenatal development of ZA, when he ascends to AVI (called “Supernal Mind” 
or “Supernal Thought”). Aba-Hochma is called “mind” or “thought,” and Ima- 
Bina is called “the world to come.” And together they are called “parents”—father 
and mother, AVI. It is there that creation begins—conception of ZA in the initial 
state of a spiritual embryo. 

Just as an embryo in our world is completely dependent on the mother, 
having absolutely no desires or life of its own, and developing only thanks to 
her, so can every man become a spiritual embryo; if he completely relinquishes 
all of his desires and actions, and submits entirely to the will of the Upper 
Partzuf, he will turn himself into a spiritual embryo, just like a physiological 
one. The difference between a physiological embryo and a spiritual one lies 
in the fact that becoming a spiritual embryo requires tremendous personal 
desire and effort, whereas the conception of a physiological embryo depends 
on the parents. 

As a result of its prenatal development within Bina (which means that one 
completely extinguishes all of his personal desires and thoughts, and, like an 
embryo, is ready to accept all that the mother gives: all of her thoughts and 
properties, regardless of how incomprehensible or unnatural they may seem to 
his essence), this embryo achieves the state of its spiritual birth. 

However, this is a state of an even greater concealment of the Upper Light 
with regard to the embryo, for it does not yet have a screen for the reception of 
this Light. Hence, this state is called Katnut, CONCEALED IN THE TRUE 
PROPHETS, i.e., in Sefirot Netzah and Hod, which ZA attains as a result of 
the process of nursing, reception of milk, the Light of Hassadim from Ima 
(mother) Bina. 

The Light of nursing comes to the NHY of ZA, and ZA attains VAK (Light 
of Nefesh'Ruach), the state of Katnut. During nursing, ZA attains the Sefira 
Yesod, which is why it is said that Yosef is born. After the nursing period is over, 
ZA ascends to AVI so as to receive from them the Light of Neshama, and this 
constitutes the state of Gadlut, called “Yosef.” 



70 


The Zohar 


ZA consists of three parts: HBD, HGT, and NHY. The process of Z eirAnpin’s 
growth, of acquiring a screen on his desires, begins with the purest, least egoistic 
part— Sefirot HBD, in which he first receives the Light of Nefesh. 

Afterwards, ZA acquires a screen on coarser egoistic desires— Sefirot HGT; 
the Light of Nefesh passes from HBD to HGT, and the Light of Ruach enters the 
empty HBD. 

Finally, ZA acquires a screen on the most egoistic Kelim—Sefirot NHY ; the 
Light of Nefesh passes from HGT to NHY, the Light of Ruach moves from HBD 
to the empty HGT, and the Light of Neshama enters the empty HBD. 

The attainment of the big state by ZA is called the birth of Yosef, for there 
emerge Sefirot NHY, of which the last Sefira, Yesod, is called “Yosef.” However, 
since the Light of Haya is not yet present, this state is called “concealment.” 
WHEN YOSEF ENTERED THE HOLY LAND AND ERECTED THEM 
THERE: that is, after the attainment of the first big state, the reception of the 
Light of Neshama, ZA continues to grow, cultivating his screen until the Light 
of Haya enters it. 

In such a state, Malchut of ZA separates from him into an independent 
Partzuf, called THE HOLY LAND, as the Light of Haya is called holiness. It 
is therefore said that Yosef entered or, rather, ASCENDED TO THE HOLY 
LAND in the Gadlut state of ZA. ZA and Nukva became equally big in the state 
of PBP ( Panim he Panim, face to face), which is the state that determines the Zivug 
between ZON. 

AND YOSEF ERECTED THEM THERE: the Light of Haya or Hochma 
fills the Partzuf only during a Zivug, when ZON (ZA and Nukva ) make a Zivug 
together. And this Light remains in Malchut, for only she (her screen) can 
reveal it. Just as AVI are GAR de Bina, YESHSUT is ZAT de Bina and the Light 
of Hochma is found only in YESHSUT, the relationship between Malchut and 
ZA works along the same principle, and the Light of Hochma is revealed only 
in Malchut. Therefore, only when the Light of Hochma fills Nukva can it be 
said that the Light has been revealed, and until that happens, it is considered 
to be concealed. 

WHEN ARE THEY SEEN? WHEN A RAINBOW CAN BE SEEN IN 
THE WORLD: ZA is called a “rainbow,” the world is Malchut, and their union 
is called a “rainbow within a cloud.” THE TIME HAS COME TO ERADICATE 
ALL THE WICKED FROM THE WORLD-as the number of the wicked grows, 
as more impure forces cling to ZON. The impure forces can influence ZON so 
greatly that the entire world will be brought to ruin, as has happened in the 



Flower Buds 


71 


time of the Flood. If so, there is no salvation for man other than through the 
revelation of the Upper Light, the Light of Haya. That is why The Zohar tells us 
that the world is saved by the flower buds appearing from the earth, meaning 
that the Light of Haya eradicates man’s impure forces from the earth (his desires, 
Malchut), and they cannot cling to her and hinder man. 

AND HAD THEY NOT APPEARED, THERE WOULD BE NO 
SALVATION FOR THE WORLD-for initially Nukva is built as big as ZA. 
This is called the “two great celestial bodies,” when Malchut is on the same 
degree as ZA, but stands behind him, back to back, unable to receive the 
Light of Hochma in the absence of the Light of Hassadim. This is why Malchut 
complains about lacking the Light of Hassadim and thus not being able to 
receive the Light of Hochma. 

Even though the moon grows as big as the Sun, it cannot shine independently, 
but only if the Sun (ZA) gives it Light. And since Malchut lacks the Light of 
Hochma, such a state is called reversed (Achor-back). And a Z ivug cannot take 
place in the position of back-to-back ( Achor be Achor). 

However, after Nukva is born and grows (receives the properties) from the 
Guf of ZA, as it is written in the Torah (Beresheet 2) that Chava (Eve) was born 
from the body of Adam, she becomes equal to ZA and enters into a Z ivug face- 
to-face ( Panim be Panim, PBP) with him. 

Also, Nukva still retained the previous Light. Moreover, precisely because 
she felt the lack of the Light in her initial state, Malchut received the Light of 
Haya specifically into her previous sufferings. Similarly, man can feel pleasure 
only and precisely because of his previous suffering. 

Therefore, The Zohar tells us that had the flower buds not appeared in 
Malchut during her Katnut, when she was standing behind ZA, she would not 
have been able to receive the Light of Haya in her state of Gadlut, as she would 
not have the Kelim (desires) to receive this Light. Every new creation is founded 
on the sensation of darkness, as it is said: the Creator emanates the Light out of 
Himself, and creates darkness out of nothingness. Man’s sensation of darkness 
signifies his readiness to receive the Light. 

6. Who sustains the world and evokes the revelation of the Patriarchs? It is the 
voice of the children engaged in the Torah. The world exists thanks to these 
children. Hence, it is said: “We will make for you pendants of gold” (Shir 
HaShirim, 1:11). These are the children, youngsters of the world, as it is said: 
“Make two cherubs of gold” ( Shemot , 25:18). 



72 


The Zohar 


The Light of Ruach is called “the children of the world,” and the Z ivug in this 
state (PjBA— face to back) is referred to as THE VOICE OF THE CHILDREN 
ENGAGED IN THE TORAH. And it is also called “threads of gold” and 
“two cherubs of gold.” Before Nukva grew, the impure forces had the power to 
destroy the world. However, precisely because Nukva grows from Z A, the right 
and left lines merge in her as one, the RAINBOW (right line) shines WITHIN 
A CLOUD (left line), and the Light of Haya can enter Malchut. Without this 
Light, the world can be destroyed as during (in the state of) the Flood. 

SO WHO IS IT THAT SUSTAINS THE WORLD: who causes the 
appearance of the Light of Haya) They are precisely the children engaged in 
the Torah. The “children” designate the Light of the opposite side, the Light 
of Ruach, the sensation of deficiency of the Light of Haya, for a “child” alludes 
to the process of nursing. The children of the house of Raban (Tinokot Shel Beit 
Raban)— are the Light of Haya, as the word “Raban” derives from “Rav” (big, 
Haya). They did not transgress, i.e., did not use their AHP (egoistic and yet 
uncorrected desires, for the word “children” designates the small state), their 
will to receive. 



Who Created These 


7. In the beginning, Rabbi Elazar opened, “Raise your eyes and you shall 
see, WHO HAS CREATED THESE” (Yeshayahu , 40:26). Raise your eyes 
where? To the place on which all eyes depend. Who is He? He is the One who 
opens eyes, Malchut de Rosh de A rich A npin. And there you shall see that 
Atik is concealed and within it lies the answer to the question: WHO HAS 
CREATED THESE? WHO? MI, ZAT de Bina, the Highest Edge of Heaven, 
and everything depends on Him. And since the question lies in Him, and He 
is concealed, He is called MI. For MI is like when the question “Who?” is 
asked, as there are no questions above Him. The question is found only at the 
Highest Boundary of Heaven. 

In the beginning, Rabbi Elazar opened, “Raise your eyes on high and look 
at who has created these.” Raise your eyes to what place? To the place, where 
all eyes depend on Him. And who is He? He is the One who opens eyes. And 
there you shall know. It is the concealed Atik, within which lies the question: 
who has created these? And who is He? MI = who. He is called by the edge of the 
Supernal Heaven, where everything belongs to him. Since there lies a question, 
and He is on a concealed path and does not reveal Himself, He is called MI. 
And because there is no question Above, this edge of Heaven is called MI. 

In Hebrew, the word MI means the question “Who?” as well as the 
preposition “from.” Since Kabbalah tells us about the property of our world’s 
roots, one spiritual object can sometimes reveal an entire range of associations, 
properties, and categories. In the same way, here the word MI is a part of the 
word ElokIM, where the last two letters form the word MI. However, at the same 
time, they carry a variety of additional charges and meanings. 

Rabbi Elazar wishes to explain how Heaven and earth were created. 
Naturally, just like the whole of the Torah, The Zohar refers only to spiritual 
degrees and categories, and does not deal with explanations of the physical 


73 



74 


The Zohar 


origin and development of our world. Moreover, it is impossible to understand 
the true origin and development of our world without attaining the spiritual 
world. However, whatever one does attain, he is unable to pass these attainments 
to others. Hence, even after he attains the full essence of our nature’s origin 
and its actions, he will still be unable to describe it in a form that will be 
comprehensible to others. 

Heaven and earth constitute the seven days of Creation—ZON of the 
world of Atzilut. However, if it is a part of Atzilut, then why is it described as 
BARAH (created, from the word Beria ) and not ATZ1L (emanated, from the 
word Atzilut) 7 . Yet, precisely herein lies the opportunity to open our eyes to the 
process of creation. 

Rosh (head) de AA has only Keter and Hochma. Malchut standing below the 
eyes, below Sefira Hochma, is called “the opening of the eyes.” After all, only 
when she opens up does the Light of Hochma pass through her from Rosh de AA 
to all the Partzufim of the world of Atzilut. 

It is therefore said that the eyes should be raised up TO THE PLACE 
ON WHICH ALL EYES DEPEND, for the Light of Hochma can fill all the 
Partzufim of the world of Atzilut only when Malchut opens up in Rosh de AA. 
Hence, the entire secret of the opening lies in Malchut. The Light of Hochma 
(the Light of Wisdom) is the Light of the eyes. It comes out of the eyes, and 
only in this Light can one see. 

The word BARAH signifies BAR (beyond), meaning outside the world 
of Atzilut. This is because Bina herself came out of the Rosh of AA and stood 
lower, outside the Rosh of AA, giving birth to, that is, precisely BARAH 
(creating) ZON. 

In Hebrew, every notion has several possible names that determine the 
specific action that takes place. Here, the birth of ZON occurred by means 
of Bina’ s exit and descent from her degree; hence, the birth of ZON is called 
BARAH, from the word BAR - outside (of one’s degree). 

The entire creation consists of only ten Sefirot. Yet, since every Sefira includes 
all the others, and since all of them are interconnected, every world, degree, 
or Sefira includes the properties of all the others, and consists of their parts. 
Therefore, every Sefira consists of Keter, Hochma, Bina, ZA, and Malchut, each of 
which in turn consists of five. In all, 5x5x5 = 125 Sefirot or steps of the ladder 
that separate us (the lowest) from the Creator (the highest). 

The property of Bina herself is not to receive the Light of Hochma. Yet, in 
order to pass the Light of Hochma to ZA and Malchut, who desire to receive it for 



Who Created These 


75 


the Creator’s sake, since receiving the Light of Hochma is the goal of creation, 
Bina allocates within herself a certain part called ZAT de Bina or YESHSUT, 
which receives the Light of Hochma from Partzuf Hochma and passes it to ZON. 
The main part, Bina herself, is called GAR de Bina. The part of Bina that receives 
the Light of Hochma is called ZAT de Bina. 

Therefore, if Bina exits the Rosh and falls into the Guf, as it occurs in the 
second restriction, this has no effect on Bina herself, for she does not suffer 
from lack of the Light of Hochma whatsoever, as though she had never left the 
Rosh. This refers only to the Upper part of Bina, GAR de Bina, which has no 
desire for Hochma. This part is called AVI, and it spans from the Peh (mouth) 
down to the Chazeh (chest) of AA. 


However, ZAT de Bina, which wants to receive Hochma for ZON, just as a 
mother who wants to receive for her children, feels the exit from the Rosh of AA 
to its Guf, for there it cannot receive the Light of Hochma, but only the Light 
of Ruach-Nefesh, VAK of the Light. This part of Bina is called YESHSUT, and it 
spans from the Chazeh down to Tabur of AA. 


ZON of the world of Atzilut, which receive from YESHSUT, span from Tabur 
to the end of the feet of AA, on the Parsa. Thus, there are two Parsaot (plural for 
Parsa): one is in the world of Atzilut, separating the Sefirot of “bestowal” (GE) 
from the Sefirot of “reception” (AHP). This Parsa is located at the chest of AA. 
The second Parsa is located between Atzilut and BYA. However, we can also say 
that every Partzuf has its own Parsa, which separates the desires of bestowal from 
the desires of reception. 


Atik 


AA 


ZON 


YESHSUT = ZAT de Bina 


AVI = GAR de Bina 


Rosh 

-Peh- 

■Chazeh 

■ Tabur 
Raglaim 


-Peh—| 
Chazeh 


Raglaim 


Parsa 

of the World 
of Atzilut 


Parsa 


Beria 


Yetzira 


Assiya 


This World 


Machsom 



















76 


The Zohar 


Although GAR de Bina are positioned below the Rosh of AA, they are 
considered not to have left it, as they do not feel it, that is, they do not want 
Hochma; they wish only to bestow, and he who wants only to bestow feels 
perfection wherever he is. All the Partzufim and their parts that have nothing 
to do with reception of Hochma (Keter, Hochma, and GAR de Bina) separate 
themselves with a Parsa from the remaining parts of the world of Atzilut that 
want Hochma (ZAT de Bina and ZON). 

The “existence of the question” that The Zohar speaks of signifies the 
sensation of the lack of Light of Hochma, the desire for it. This is felt by ZON, 
which is why they raise MAN. MAN is a request of the lower one to receive 
the Light of Hochma from the Upper One for the Creator’s sake. It is called 
a “question,” for a question is similar to prayer or request. The Zohar tells us 
that the question exists only in YESHSUT, meaning that it receives MAN from 
below, from ZON. 

And before that, it is said of YESHSUT: BARAH (from the word Beria = BAR), 
something that exists outside of its degree. What did it do? BARAH (created) 
ELEH ( AHP, ZON). However, it created them as headless as itself. For the word 
BARAH (beyond) indicates the lack of a Rosh (Kelim of the world of Atzilut). 

ZAT de Bina that wait for an “answer to their question,” for the Light of 
Hochma, are called MI. It is said BARAH in regards to them because they exited 
and descended independently from the level of the Rosh de AA to below its 
Chazeh. These are ZAT de Bina, called YESHSUT or MI, the “Highest Edge of 
Heaven,” for Heaven refers to ZA, who receives from YESHSUT. Malchut is 
called “earth.” 

ZAT de Bina is called “firmament.” 

ZA is called “Heaven.” 

Malchut is called “earth.” 

All that exists below YESHSUT (ZON and the worlds of BYA) receives from 
it. Hence, it is considered that YESHSUT revives the whole of creation: whatever 
it has, they will receive it, too. However, their MAN determines whether or not 
YESHSUT will have something to bestow upon them. 

THERE LIES NO QUESTION in GAR de Bina (AVI). They do not receive 
MAN for the reception of Hochma, and they never feel any lack of Hochma, 
neither for themselves nor so as to give to others. Only ZAT de Bina or YESHSUT 
are created and exist for the question, for the reception of MAN (ZON’s plea). 
YESHSUT raises MAN that is received from ZON to the Rosh of AA and receives 



Who Created These 


77 


the Light of Hochma from there. YESHSUT is called the “Highest Edge of 
Heaven,” for ZA, called “Heaven,” receives from it. 

8. But there is another one below, called MA. What is in common between 
this one and that one? The first one is concealed and is called MI. There exists 
a question in it for man to inquire and research in order to see and know all 
the degrees, down to the end of all degrees, which is M alchut. That is MA. 
What does MA mean? MA (what) do you know? What do you see? What do 
you research? After all, everything is initially concealed. 

Being in a state of Zivug PBP with ZA, Malchut is also called MA (like ZA) and 
is considered the lowest edge of Heaven, for she concludes all the degrees and 
Atzilut. ZA, called “Heaven,” stands between Malchut (lowest edge of Heaven) 
and YESHSUT (Highest Edge of Heaven). 

MAN MUST INQUIRE, SEE, RESEARCH—only if one who is below 
ZON raises MAN (his prayer) to ZON will they raise this MAN higher. For ZON 
themselves are corrected by the Light of Hassadim, and do not want to receive 
the Light of Hochma. And only if a request comes from below, from man, will 
ZON ascend to YESHSUT and ask for the Light of Hochma. YESHSUT proceeds 
to raise MAN to AVI, and AVI raise MAN to AA: AVI ascend to the Rosh of AA, 
where there is the Light of Hochma, where they make a Zivug on this Light. 

A Zivug of AVI is called “Aba and Ima looking at each other.” To “look” 
means to receive the Light of Hochma (to “hear” means to receive the Light of 
Hassadim). As a result of AVI’s ascent to the Rosh of AA, Bina starts receiving 
Hochma for ZON. All the Partzufim of the world of Atzilut are corrected by the 
Light of Hassadim in such a way that they do not want to receive the Light of 
Hochma for themselves. 

He who is able to raise his request (MAN) to compel ZON to ascend to 
YESHSUT, whereupon YESHSUT and AVI will ascend to the Rosh of AA together 
so as to receive the Light for him—such a person is not simply considered a mere 
“person,” but a “righteous”! 

The request that one raises to ZON is called one’s “soul,” for a soul is a 
vessel, a desire filled with Light. However, the Light inside a vessel is determined 
by the desire. Hence, the spiritual desire, the intention to act for the Creator’s 
sake is called “a soul.” Naturally, if one does not yet have such an intention, he 
does not have a soul. 

The spiritual world is a world of only desires without any corporeal 
shells. The reader must revise his ideas about the soul, body, connections 




78 


The Zohar 


between worlds, etc., and correct himself continually so as to properly inter- 
pret these categories. 

So then, man’s corrected desires are called “the souls of the righteous.” 
These souls of the righteous ascend to ZON in the form of MAN and compel 
ZON to ascend to YESHSUT. The presence of ZON creates in YESHSUT a 
desire to receive the Light of Hochma. This compels YESHSUT (ZAT de Bina) to 
ascend to the Rosh of AA and there join with GAR de Bina (AVI) into one Partzuf. 
And then AVI (AB + SAG = AA + AVI) look at each other, exchange the Light of 
Hochma between them, and pass it down to ZON. 

Without a request from below, AVI will be satisfied with the Light of 
Hassadim and will not “look” at one another. Only the request of their children 
(ZON) compels AVI to face each other (Panim he Panim) and make a Zivug. In 
this Zivug, Ima-Bina receives the Light of Hochma for the children, ZON, from 
Aba-Hochma. 

However, this occurs BECAUSE MAN INQUIRED—man’s question 
signifies the raising of MAN so as to make AVI look at each other, make a Zivug 
together, and let Ima receive Hochma from Aba for the man that is elevating his 
soul. The descending Light of Hochma is called knowledge or wisdom (Daat), 
for ZON ascend to YESHSUT + AVI, and there stimulate a Zivug on the Light 
of Hochma, called “knowledge.” Hence, it is written in the Torah: “And Adam 
came to know his wife.” 

Thus, to COME TO KNOW means to receive the Light of Hochma. ZON 
that stand in AVI and compel AVI to receive the Light of Hochma are called Daat 
(knowledge) or the Sefira Daat. 

Yet, Daat is not an additional Sefira. There are only ten Sefirot. However, in 
order to designate the fact that ZON’s request for the Light of Hochma is inside 
the ten Sefirot of Partzuf AVI, we say that AVI have a Sefira called Daat. In this case, 
instead of the regular count of Sefirot: KHB-HGT-NHYM, we count the Sefirot: 
HBD-HGT-NHYM. The Sefira Keter is omitted, and we only mention the Sefira 
Daat after Hochma-Aba and Bina-Ima. FROM ONE DEGREE TO ANOTHER 
signifies the passing of the Light of Hochma from the Sefira Daat of the degree of 
AVI to the degree of ZA. And TO THE END OF ALL DEGREES-from ZA to 
Malchut, which is called “the end of all degrees.” 

When the Light is present in Nukva, she is called MA, and the Light that she 
passes to the lower ones is called 100 blessings. There are several states in Nukva, 
Malchut of the world of Atzilut. We need to know them, for all that we receive, 



Who Created These 


79 


we receive from her alone. In addition to all stages of growth from a point to a 
full Partzuf, a grown Malchut has two big states. 

Malchut attains the first big state when she receives the Light of Neshama. 
This occurs when, due to her MAN, AVI ascend one degree from their 
permanent place to the Rosh of AA. However, although YESHSUT ascends from 
its permanent place between the chest ( Chazeh ) and the navel ( Tabur ) of AA to 
where AVI used to be (between the mouth and the chest of AA), it still remains 
clothed onto the Guf of AA, even though it merges into one Partzuf with AVI. 

And since YESHSUT now clothes the place from the mouth ( Peh ) to the 
Chazeh of AA from the outside, YESHSUT becomes like the Rosh of AA, as it 
merged with AVI in the Rosh of AA as one Partzuf. Also, YESHSUT ascends from 
under the Parsa of Atzilut in the Chazeh of AA and stands above it, where the 
Rosh of AA shines. 

That is why YESHSUT passes the Light of Hochma to ZA, and ZA passes 
it on to Malchut, who fills herself with this Light, called ‘TOO blessings,” for, 
having received this Light, ZON can ascend to the permanent place of YESHSUT 
between the Chazeh and the Tabur of AA. 

By ascending to this degree, Malchut becomes like Ima. In the spiritual 
world, the degree of a spiritual object determines all of its properties. Even 
in our world, the degree of man’s inner development alone determines his 
properties, thoughts, and desires. And since Ima equals 100, Malchut, too, is 
called “100,” so as to emphasize the fact that Malchut ascended to Bina of the 
world of Atzilut. 

Now Malchut is similar to MI just as YESHSUT was prior to raising MAN and 
passing the Light. This is because she now clothes the place of the small state of 
YESHSUT from the Chazeh to the Tabur of AA, and stands under the Parsa of the 
world of Atzilut, below which the Light from the Rosh de AA cannot pass. 

That is why Malchut gained no Light, for the sake of which she had raised 
MAN. Nevertheless, Malchut gains by receiving the properties of Ima-Bina, for 
she ascended to YESHSUT, called Ima. 

Hence, the Light that Malchut received is only considered VAK of the Gadlut 
state, the first state of Gadlut. Malchut will not be able to receive the GAR of 
Gadlut, the second Gadlut, the Light of Hochma (Haya), as long as she is under 
the Parsa of Atzilut in the Chazeh of AA. (How Malchut receives GAR of the 
Gadlut is explained in items 11 through 15 in the next article). 



80 


The Zohar 


The Zohar calls Nukva that ascended to YESHSUT by the word MA (from 
the word Me’ah—100), for by means of this ascent, Malchut gained the properties 
of Bina— 100 blessings. And she gained the sensation of the question—she feels 
that it has only VAK (a half, a part of the big state). Put differently, she feels the 
desire for its second half, GAR. Nevertheless, she gained a part of the big state, 
VAK of AVI. 

Thus, Nukva became like YESHSUT before it raised MAN, but gained the 
properties of Bina, 100 blessings. And since this is VAK of the Light of the big 
state, she feels a deficiency (a question), just as YESHSUT felt prior to raising 
MAN—at its place, when YESHSUT was in the Katnut state. When it ascended 
to AVI, AVI ascended to AA, and ZON ascended to the place of YESHSUT. AVI 
shine from the Rosh of AA on the place of YESHSUT. ZON that stand there now 
feel the Light that they receive from AVI, and realize that this is merely a part of 
the Light, which generates another question within them. 

9. This is the secret defined by the word MA: WHAT do you testify and 
WHAT is equal to you? When the Temple was destroyed, a voice came forth 
and said, “What (MA) shall I indicate to you, and what (MA) shall I equate 
to you?” ( Eicha , 2:13). However, here ALA means, “What is the covenant, 
testimony, what (MA) is equal to you?” For every day testifies to you the days 
of past, as it is said: “This day I call onto Heaven and earth to witness for you” 
(Devarim, 30:19). WHAT is equal to you? It is said: “I adorned you with holy 
adornments and made you ruler of the world.” And it is said: “Is this the 
city that men called the quintessence of beauty?” (Eicha, 2:15). I have called 
you, “Jerusalem, a city rebuilt by me” (Tehilim, 122:3). “What shall I equate 
to you?” (Eicha, 2:13). Just as you sit here, so He sits Above in Supernal 
Jerusalem. Just as the holy nation does not enter into you, so I swear to you 
that I will not enter Above until I enter you down below. And this is your 
consolation—that I will equate you with this degree, with Supernal Jerusalem, 
which is the Supernal Malchut (Hebrew - Kingdom) that rules over all. But 
for now you are here, and “Your misery is great, like the sea” (Eicha, 2:13). 
And if you say that there is no existence or salvation for you, then WHO (MI) 
shall heal you (not Who? with a question mark, but the Upper Force called 
WHO is what will heal you), that is, that same concealed Upper Degree, which 
is called MI, Bina that revives all, shall heal and revive you. 

In other words, MA and MI, besides being translated as WHAT and WHO, 
also designate the names of spiritual objects that perform actions described 
in The Zohar. The destruction of the Temple was the consequence of Israel’s 



Who Created These 


81 


transgression of egoistic reception, because they did not want to raise MAN 
for the Zivug of ZON, and instead wished to receive the Light into the impure 
forces, their egoistic desires, called “other gods” ( Elokim Acherim). There is 
only one Creator. 

There is but one property for the Creator, and we know it—the property 
of bestowal. Drawing closer to this property is defined as working “for the 
Creator’s sake.” Any other desire can only mean distancing from this property 
and from the Creator, for except for this property or its opposite (rather, its 
absence), nothing else exists in creation. Hence, man’s inner movement towards 
the property of “reception” pushes him away from the Creator, and is therefore 
called “worshipping other gods.” As a result, ZON stopped their Zivug, the 100 
blessings disappeared from Nukva, and the Temple was ruined. 

The First Temple— Malchut ascended to AVI and there receives the Light of 
Haya. Its ruin is the fall of Malchut to the level of reception of the Light GAR 
de Ruach. 

The Second Temple is Malchut’s ascension to YESHSUT and the reception 
of the Light of Neshama. In its ruin, Malchut fell to the level of reception of the 
Light of Nefesh in her Sefira Keter, while the other nine Sefirot fall below the 
Parsa. Such a state is called Galut— exile from the spiritual, from the world of 
Atzilut. The single Sefira Malchut in the world of Atzilut remains as a point below 
the Sefira Yesod of ZA. 

ZA is called “six days” and Malchut is called Shabbat (Saturday). Yet, is Malchut 
really bigger than ZA, as Shabbat is bigger (higher) than weekdays? The worlds 
of BYA, including our world, receive the Light, their life-force, from Malchut. 
The “six weekdays” are a state of ZON when ZA and Malchut are unconnected 
to one another. Shabbat is a state of ZON when Malchut joins with ZA, a Zivug 
takes place between them, and Malchut receives the Light from ZA and passes it 
on to the whole world. 

Since the state of Malchut when she passes the Light received from ZA down 
to the world is important to us, by measuring our states in accordance with what 
we receive from Malchut, we define the extent of maximal reception as Shabbat. 
(Naturally, this has nothing to do with our calendar: weekdays and Shabbat are 
spiritual states that transcend time). 

AND A VOICE CAME FORTH AND SAID: “EACH AND EVERY DAY 
MY COVENANT HAS BEEN IN YOU SINCE THE DAYS OF PAST”- 
here, The Zohar speaks of the Light of VAK that ZON receive in the state of 
Gadlut, which Nukva receives as MA. This Light is called “the past days” ( Yamim 




82 


The Zohar 


Kadmonim). Therefore, it is written in the Torah ( Devarim, 4:32): “Ask now of 
the past days, which were before you, since the day the Creator created man, 
from one edge of Heaven unto the other, whether there has been any such thing 
as great as this?...” 

The Light of VAK of the Gadlut state is called in ZON “the past days,” for 
it is VAK of AVI. YESHSUT is ZAT of AVI. ZAT is an abbreviation of the words 
Zayin (7), and Tachtonot (lower, meaning the lower Sefirot). ZAT of AVI, meaning 
the seven Sefirot of Partzuf AVI, is YESHSUT. These Zayin are seven days, the 
seven primary Sefirot of AVI with regard to Zayin, the seven days or the seven 
Sefirot of ZON. 

Hence, it is written, “MY COVENANT EACH AND EVERY DAY BY 
HEAVEN AND EARTH” ( Devarim , 4:26). These words of the Torah speak of 
the Zivug of ZON called “Heaven” (ZA) and “earth” ( Nukva ). “The past days” 
or “Supernal Days” constitute YESHSUT, and “the low days” or “the present 
days” are ZON. 

In this sentence, the Creator cautions that the Zivug of ZON needs to be 
constantly realized and maintained. Otherwise, the Creator warns that “you will 
disappear from the earth.” And this is the meaning of the Creator’s warning 
about the 100 blessings: they should be guarded and constantly created. 

For these 100 blessings that Nukva receives from ZA every day in the Zivug of 
MA between them take place during the ascent of ZON to YESHSUT, when ZA 
becomes like YeshS ( Israel-Saba ) and Nukva becomes like T (T vunah). YESHSUT 
stands for I srael-Saba and Tvunah. And then, the Light that Nukva receives from 
ZA becomes 100 blessings, like the Light in Tvunah. 

It is said about it, “the city that united with her,” for Nukva, called “city,” 
merged with Tvunah, and Nukva became like Tvunah. And Nukva receives in 
Tvunah the Light of Tvunah, called “holy adornments,” and then, like a crown of 
beauty, she surrounds the earth and receives power over the earth. 

However, as a result of Israel’s transgressions (the rise of impure desires 
over the pure ones), the Temple is ruined (the Light disappeared), and Israel 
is banished from its land (fell to lower degrees). This led to the distancing of 
Nukva (all creatures) from ZA (the Creator), for the lower nine Sefirot (desires) of 
Nukva fell to the impure forces (became egoistic). In other words, the nine pure, 
altruistic desires (forces) lost their screen and became egoistic, and Nukva herself 
turned into a point that stands below the Sefira Yesod of ZA. 

Hence, it is written: “WHO SHALL REBUILD YOU AND HEAL YOU”- 
if the sons of Israel return in their aspirations to the Creator (to altruism), called 



Who Created These 


83 


“the return,” correct their deeds (desires), and raise their prayers (MAN) for help 
in their correction to the Creator in ZON, they will once more be able to receive 
the Upper Light in ZON, Nukva will rise again to YESHSUT, called MI, and will 
be healed thereby (the Upper Light will enter Malchut, the souls, and will impart 
its properties onto them). 

10. MI—WHO sets the boundary of Heaven Above—YESHSUT. MA— 
WHAT sets the boundary of Heaven below—ZA and Malchut. And this is 
what Yaakov inherited, as he is ZA that shines from end to end. From one 
boundary, which is MI, to the other boundary, which is ALA. For he, Yaakov, 
stands in the middle, between YESHSUT and Malchut. Hence, it is said, 
MI BARAH ELEH: MI is YESHSUT, BARAH means created, and ELEH 
stands for ZA and Malchut. 

Actually, it should rather be written, “from the beginning, i.e., from the 
Height of Heaven down to its end (lowest point) below.” Yet it says, “from the 
boundary of Heaven.” MI is YESHSUT thatupholds everything with its question, 
the desire to receive the Light for ZON. MA is Nukva. Before Nukva raises MAN, 
she is the very last degree, standing below the Chazeh of ZA. Between YESHSUT 
and Nukva stands Yaakov—ZA that clothes AA from Tabur to Malchut of AA. 


Creator 

The World of AK 


The World of Atzilut 


AVI 


YESHSUT 


Keter 


ZA& Malchut 


AA 

Rosh 

— Peh— 

-Chazeh ■ 

- Tabur 
Raglaim 


(Atik inside of AA is unattainable) 


Parsa 

of the World 
of Atzilut 

Parsa 

of the Worlds 


9 


The World of Beria ABYA 


lower 
Sefirot 
of Malchut 


The World of Yetzira 
The World of Assiya 


This World 



















84 


The Zohar 


Arich Anpin is the central Partzuf in the world of Atzilut. Since At ik is 
unattainable, everything comes from AA, and all the Partzufim of the world of 
Atzilut clothe it (receive from it): Rosh de AA towers over all, and no one can 
clothe it, meaning no one can attain its thoughts and reasons for its actions. 

The next Partzuf is AVI. AVI clothe (attain) AA from Pel i to Chazeh. Below AVI 
stands Partzuf YESHSU T, clothing AA from Chazeh to Tabur. ZA stands below 
YESHSUT and clothes AA from Tabur downwards. Partzuf ZA is incomplete, as 
he has only six Sefirot HBD-HGT or VAK ; he is in the Katnut state, ending with 
his Sefira Tifferet (his Chazeh). 

Nukva (Malchut) stands below ZA, or parallel to his last Sefira Tifferet (the 
Chazeh of ZA). She has only one Sefira Keter, whereas her nine other Sefirot 
fell below the Parsa to the worlds BYA. The entire world of Atzilut ends at 
the Chazeh of ZA, where the single Sefira of Malchut stands, who is therefore 
called a point. 

In our world, there is desire and its physical manifestation—action. For 
example, one wants to receive something, but he does not allow himself to 
perform the physical act of taking. Meanwhile, his desire to take remains the 
same. In the spiritual world, there are no bodies, only bare desires. Therefore, 
the desire itself already constitutes action, like an already completed mental 
and physical action in our world. Therefore, the desire alone determines man’s 
spiritual state. 

Just imagine what it would be like if in our world we judged a person not by 
his actions, but by his desires! It is terrifying to think how distant we are from 
spiritual demands. However, our desires are determined by our spiritual degree. 
And The Zohar explains that only by raising MAN (the request for correction) 
can we attract onto us the flow of Upper Light, which will correct and elevate us 
to a Higher Degree. And we will immediately begin to think and desire whatever 
that degree will evoke within us. 

Therefore, our task is to attain the desire for correction. To this end, we 
need a “question,” perception of our state as intolerable. This is called the 
realization of evil, i.e., that our egoism is evil, that it brings me harm by severing 
me from the spiritual. 

However, in order for this to happen, we need to come to sense at least a 
little bit of what the spiritual is and how good it is. Evil can only be realized in 
contrast with good. Yet, how can we sense the spiritual if we have yet to escape 
egoism? In what Kelim (desires) can we sense this? Even though we lack corrected 
desires, and therefore cannot sense the spiritual, as a result of studying Kabbalah, 




Who Created These 


85 


one begins to sense the Surrounding Light, which bestows onto him the desire 
for the spiritual (See “Introduction to the Study of the Ten Sefirot,” item 155). 

The desire of one who physically exists in our world, but spiritually exists 
in the worlds of BYA—is a desire to enjoy the Light. However, opposite these 
desires one has an “anti-desire,” a screen, which neutralizes his innate will to 
receive pleasure. 

A screen is created (appears, emerges, born) within the Kli (desire, man) as a 
result of man’s sensation of the spiritual Light (the Creator). Therefore, all our 
requests (prayers, MAN, “questions”) should be about one thing only: for the 
Creator to grant us the strength necessary to ascend spiritually, to transform our 
desires or, as Kabbalah defines it, to acquire a screen. It is impossible to annul 
one’s will to receive pleasure. The Creator created it, and it is His only creation. 
All we can do is acquire a screen (counterbalance) on it, thereby ascending above 
creation (egoism), and become similar to the Creator! And to the extent of this 
similarity, to merge with him. 

Thus, Partzuf Yaakov stands from MI (YESHSUT) to MA (Malchut), from 
end to end. However, what is referred to here is the state of ZON, when they 
ascend to YESHSUT and receive the Light of its degree. 

The entire spiritual distance from us to the Creator is divided into 125 
invisible degrees, all of them named. These degrees differ from one another 
only by the magnitude of their screen on man’s egoistic desires. Man receives 
the Light in his corrected, altruistic desires. The volume of the received Light 
depends on the screen’s magnitude (the size of the desire’s corrected part). 

Every degree is characterized by a particular sensation of the Creator, and 
this sensation is called Light. Hence, we can designate the spiritual state of the 
Kli (man) in the spiritual world by the name of its degree or the name of the 
Light it receives, as every degree has its own particular Light. These gradations of 
the sensation of the Creator are precisely what we call spiritual degrees. 

That is why, having ascended to a degree called YESHSUT, ZON receive 
the Light of YESHSUT, although Partzuf YESHSUT itself ascended, accordingly, 
to a Higher Degree, and there receives the Light of that degree, called AVI. In 
turn, AVI ascend to a degree called AA, where they receive the Light of AA. We 
call degrees by the names of the Partzufim that abide there in their usual, lowest 
state. Such a state is called permanent. 

Even though by ascending to a Higher Degree, the lower Partzuf receives 
the Light of that degree, which changes its properties, the Partzuf remains itself 
nonetheless, just as a person who acquires new properties remains a person, 




86 


The Zohar 


though now one of another level. Therefore, when it is said, “having ascended 


to the Upper One, the lower one becomes like him,” it implies a change only in 


the inner properties of man (or Partzuf), but not in his identity. 

Upon ascending to YESHSUT, ZA receives greater Light, for an ascent 
in the spiritual world signifies an increase in the magnitude of a screen, and, 
accordingly, reception of greater Light. That is to say, ZA himself grew, but did 
not turn into YESHSUT: previously, at his own place, he had only the Light 
Ruach'Nefesh, but upon ascending and acquiring a screen, he receives the Light 
of Neshama as well. 

Therefore, all the places between us and the Creator are established, and 
the Partzufim that are there “stand” on them in their permanent place. However, 
all the Partzufim and the worlds can ascend relative to their permanent, lowest 
states by one, two, or three degrees. In its lowest state, a Partzuf has only GE and 
no AHP, and only the Light of Nefesh-Ruach. 

By receiving the Light of correction from Above, the Partzuf can gradually 
correct its AHP: it corrects the Sefira Bina and receives the Light of Neshama, 
which designates an ascent of one degree. After that, the Partzuf corrects 
the Sefira ZA, and receives the Light of Haya, which designates an ascent 
to another degree, i.e., already two degrees. And after that, it corrects Sefira 
Malchut and receives the Light of Yechida, which designates an ascent to yet 
another degree, a third one. 



Keter 


Hochma = Eynaim 

-Parsa, Nikvey Eynaim, Masach of Partzuf — 

Bina = Awzen (ascent of Bina to GE = ascent by 1 degree) 


ZA - Hotem (ascent of ZA to GE = ascent by 2 degrees) 


Malchut - Peh (ascent of Malchut to GE = ascent by 3 degrees) 


However, the new Light does not enter the just corrected Kli (Sefira), but 
comes from Above and enters through the Sefira Keter. 








Who Created These 


87 


LIGHT 


SEFIRA 


Yechida 
Haya 
Neshama 
Ruach 
Nefesh 
' r 


Keter 

GE 

Hochma 

Bina 

AHP 

ZA 

Malchut 


Man’s spiritual ascent can be the consequence of two factors: 

1. An awakening of a desire from Above, called “special days”—holidays, 
new moons, Sabbaths. This kind of an ascent is called “an awakening 
from Above,” and leads to the general ascent of all the worlds ABYA, 
and, consequently, of all that inhabits them. 

2. Man’s efforts in his studies and inner work, his prayer to merit the Cre¬ 
ator personally giving him the strength to ascend to a Higher Degree. 

Moreover, such an ascent is not limited to only three degrees, but can elevate 
man along all 125 degrees to the Creator Himself. Ascension to the Highest 
Degree is precisely the purpose for which man was created. He must accomplish 
this task while still living in this world. And until he attains this goal, he will 
have to return to this world again and again. 

Although ZON are called “the last days,” upon ascending and receiving the 
Light of YESHSDT, they receive the name “the days past or first days.” In this 
instance, one boundary of Heaven (Malchut or MA) ascends and clothes the 
other boundary of Heaven (YESHSDT or MI). MA and MI merge in one, and 
The Zohar emphasizes that fact. AND KNOW: 

Ml - WHO 

BARAH - CREATED 


ELEH 


THIS 













88 


The Zohar 


MI is YESHSUT that stands in the place of Bina de AA, from Chazeh to Tabur 
de AA. And although only Kelim of GE (vessels of bestowal) are present in the 
world of Atzilut, there are Partzufim among them that wish only to “bestow”: 
Atik, AA, AVI, and those that want to receive for the sake of bestowal, so as to 
pass the Light on to YESHSUT and ZON. 


World of Atzilut 



YESHSUT and ZON want to receive the Light so as to pass it to the souls of 
the righteous, the people who seek correction. Hence, within the world of Atzilut 
there is a division into two types of Kelim—GE and AHP. They are separated from 
each other by the Parsa of the world of Atzilut that stands in the Chazeh of AA. 


World of Atzilut 


Atik 


ZON 


YESHSUT 


AVI 


AA 

Rosh 

-Peh — 
Chazeh - 


-Tabur— 

Raglaim 


Parsa 

of the World 
of Atzilut 


Parsa between 
Atzilut and the 
Worlds BYA 


The Light from the Rosh de AA does not pass below the Parsa of the world of 
Atzilut. Therefore, YESHSUT in its permanent state, or ZON, when they ascend 

























Who Created These 


89 


to YESHSUT, cannot receive the Light of Rosh de AA. This is why they have the 
desire to receive the Light of Hochma, called “question.” The question (desire 
to receive the Light of Hochma ) therefore amounts to Ml ( YESHSUT, the Light 
of YESHSUT), which is BARAH (beyond ELEH—ZON), and upon their ascent, 
ZON do not receive the Light of Hochma, as they are outside the Rosh of AA, 
outside of the Light of Hochma, but with a question (a desire for it). This enables 
them to continue their ascent. 




Who Created These (by Eliyahu) 


11. Rabbi Shimon said: “Elazar, my son, reveal the supernal secret, which 
the dwellers of this world know nothing about.” Rabbi Elazar was silent. 
Rabbi Shimon wept and paused for a moment, and then said, “Elazar, what 
is ELEH?” If you say that they are like the stars and the signs of the zodiac 
(destiny), are they not always visible (unlike the changeable signs of destiny)? 
And in MA, that is in Malchut, they were created as it is written, “By the 
word of the Creator were the Heavens made” ( Tehilim , 33:6), meaning that 
the Heavens were made by Malchut, called the Creator’s word. And if ELEH 
speak of the hidden secrets, then there would be no need to write ELEH, as 
the stars and the signs of destinies are visible to all (the word ELEH (THIS) 
tells us that something is clear). 

Rabbi Elazar did not reveal the reception of the Light of the first Gadlut 
state (Ohr Neshama), and Rabbi Shimon wished to reveal the way to receive the 
Light of the second Gadlut state ( Ohr Haya). Therefore, he asked Rabbi Elazar 
to speak and to reveal the way to attain Ohr Neshama, which is concealed from 
people by a supernal secret, for this Light has not yet been revealed in the world, 
and Rabbi Shimon reveals it here. 

The fact is that, although there were righteous who attained the Light of 
Haya, there was no one among them who could explain the path of its attainment 
in detail, no one who could reveal it to the entire world. This is so because to 
understand means to attain, to ascend to that degree, which depends only on 
man’s efforts. While there were many people throughout the generations who 
attained the degree of ELEH, revealing it to the world requires an even greater 
degree, and a special permission by the Creator (See the article The Conditions 
for Disclosing the Secrets of the Wisdom of Kabbalah ). 

Rabbi Shimon asked him what ELEH means, what new things is the Torah 
telling us with the words, MI BARAH ELEH (WHO CREATED THESE), where 


91 



92 


The Zohar 


the word ELEH designates ZON? After all, if it speaks of die stars and the signs 
of the zodiac—luck, which signify the Light of VAK of the big state, then what 
is so special about it? After all, ZON can receive this Light even on weekdays. 
There is nothing so extraordinary in this to mention MI - WHO CREATED 
THIS separately. 

(One might say that this Light is constant, for only the Light of VAK is 
constantly present in ZON, but not GAR. And only as a result of MAN does 
ZON receive the Light of VAK of the big state, the Light of Neshama. The answer 
lies in that this Light can be received at any time, even on weekdays during the 
morning prayer. However, he still does not understand why these were created 
in MA. After all, Light refers not to Bina, but to the ZON of the world of A tzilut, 
called MA, and exits them, as is written BY THE WORD OF THE CREATOR, 
where the Creator is ZA and His word is Malchut.) 

12. However, this secret was revealed on another day, when I was on the 
seashore. The prophet Eliyahu came to me and said: “Rabbi, do you know 
the meaning of MI BARAH ELEH - WHO HAS CREATED THESE?” I 
answered: “These are the Heavens and its forces, the works of the Creator, 
looking at which, people should bless Him, as it is said, ‘When I behold Your 
Heavens, the work of Your hands’ ( Tehilim , 8:4), and ‘O LORD! Our Lord! 
How glorious is Your name throughout all the earth!”’ ( Tehilim , 8:10). 

13. He replied to me: “Rabbi, the Creator took the concealed and revealed it 
to the Celestial Council. And here it is: When the most Concealed of all that 
are Concealed desired to reveal Himself, He first made a single point, which 
is Malchut, and it ascended to His Thought, that is, into Bina, meaning that 
Malchut ascended and merged with Bina. In her, He shaped all the creatures, 
and in her confirmed all the laws.” 

At ik is the first Partzuf and the Rosh of the world of Atzilut. And it is called 
the most concealed and secret of all the Partzufim, and its name—Atik (from the 
word Ne’etak— isolated, unattainable) testifies to that fact. No one can attain 
this Partzuf in itself, its properties, but we can attain it the way it appears to 
us: Atik deliberately diminishes and changes itself in such a way that the lower 
ones could attain the outer form (its properties) in which it appears to them, 
but not Atik itself. 

In the words of The Zohar, when Atik wished to reveal itself to the worlds, 
although it is a Partzuf that acts according to the laws of the first restriction, it 
“clothed itself in the garments” (an external Partzuf that acts according to the 



Who Created These (by Eliyahu) 


93 


laws of the second restriction) with regard to the lower ones so as to enable them 
to perceive and attain it. 

There is an enormous difference between the properties of the sensory 
organs that perceive sensations of the first and the second restrictions. Just as 
man in our world is born without sensory organs that can perceive spiritual 
worlds, which is why he cannot sense them, so is the Partzuf that is corrected 
for the conditions of spiritual work at the level of the second restriction unable 
to accept (perceive) the Light that descends according to the law of the first 
restriction. A similar distinction exists between Partzuf Atik and the other 
Partzufim of the world of Atzilut and the worlds of BYA. 

To be connected to the lower ones, At ik elevated Malchut de Rosh de AA 
within the Rosh of the lower-standing AA up to the Sefira Hochma. As a result, 
Sefirot Bina and ZON de Rosh de AA fell from the Rosh of AA to its Guf. After 
all, Malchut ascended from the Peh to the Eynaim and stood in the Rosh at place 
of Bina, whereas Bina and ZON exited the Rosh. The Guf (body) begins after 
Malchut de Rosh (after the decision on how to act), wherever it may be. 

Here is how one should understand this: the Sefirot of the Rosh are the 
thoughts and desires with regards to which the Partzuf, man’s inner properties 
(man himself) makes the decisions as to how they can be used in order to advance 
as much as possible toward the goal of creation. The fact that Sefirot Bina and 
ZON exited the Rosh of AA means that Partzuf AA cannot make any decisions 
with regard to them for lack of a screen on them. This is why they fell into the 
Guf, outside the Rosh. 

Hence, their remaining role is only to receive the Light from the Rosh, just 
as it is received by all the Sefirot of the Guf. In other words, they receive the Light 
that is accepted by the screen of Sefirot Keter and Hochma that remained in the 
Rosh. Man deliberately restricts the use of his desires, and uses only those desires 
with which he can work for the Creator’s sake. 

Therefore, when Malchut ascended and stood under the Sefira Hochma, 
Hochma became like the male part (bestowing, fulfilling), and Malchut became 
like the female (receiving) part of the Rosh. And since Malchut took the place of 
Bina (called “thought”), Malchut assumed the name “thought,” since now it’s 
Malchut that makes a Z ivug and receives O hr Hochma. 

A Partzuf that receives from Hochma is defined as Bina, and not Malchut. 
Therefore, although Malchut herself is merely a black point (egoistic creature), as 
a result of her ascent, she becomes Bina, i.e., Malchut acquires Bina’ s properties. 
Hence, Malchut is now called Bina or “thought.” 



94 


The Zohar 


The Zohar calls a “thought” either to Hochma or to Bina. The difference is 
that a thought is something that is received from Hochma. Hence, Bina is called 
a thought only if she is in the Rosh and receives the Light from Hochma. In 
the first restriction, Bina always receives from Hochma, and is called “thought.” 
However, in the second restriction, Malchut ascended above Bina and started 
receiving from Hochma. That is why it is Malchut that is now called “thought,” 
and not Bina. 

All the Partzufim of the worlds of ABYA are created by this ascent of Malchut 
to Bina. Therefore, it is written: IN HER HE SHAPED ALL THE CREATURES, 
AND IN HER CONFIRMED ALL THE LAWS-Se/irot Keter and Hochma 
remained in the Rosh of each Partzuf, and a Zivug was made on these two Sefirot. 
This is why the Light received in Guf of the Partzuf consists of only two Lights, 
Nefesh and Ruach. 

Previously, Malchut stood in Peh de Rosh and the Rosh (the part of the Partzuf 
in which it calculated how much Light it can receive for the Creator’s sake) 
ended there. Then, the Partzuf would receive that Light from the Rosh to the 
Guf, between the Peh and the Tabur. 

But now Malchut ascended to Eynaim de Rosh and stands under them. This 
is known as the ascent of Malchut to NE ( Nikvey Eynaim - pupils of the eyes), 
which are called NE precisely because Nikvey Eynaim means Malchut of the eyes. 
Prior to Malchut’s ascent to the Eynaim, it was as though there were no pupils 
(NE). It is worth noting that only in Malchut (desire) can we feel what surrounds 
us (the Creator, Light). This is why all of our sensory organs are designed as 
apertures: Nekev (orifice), Nukva, Malchut in the eyes, Awznaim (ears), Hotem 
(nose) and Peh (mouth). 

Only he who can create desires that work according to the principle of the 
second restriction through his own strength and effort, and puts Malchut after 
Keter-Hochma (thinks in terms of bestowal), can start perceiving through this 
corrected spiritual sensory organ. Wherever there is a screen, it constitutes that 
sensory organ with which one can perceive the Upper Light. 

Upon her ascent, Malchut stood under Hochma and made a Zivug on her 
own screen, on Sefirot Keter-Hochma (GE). Sefirot Bina-ZA-Malchut (AHP ) are 
located below the Rosh, in the Guf of the Partzuf, and passively receive the Light 
from the Rosh. This leads to a division of the ten Sefirot of the Guf, KHB-ZA-M, 
in the same way the ten Sefirot of the Rosh were divided: Sefirot K-H of the Guf 
continue receiving from KH of the Rosh, and Sefirot B-ZA-M of the Guf, being 
unable to receive from the Rosh, start receiving from K-H of the Guf, like the 
Sefirot below the Tabur of the Partzuf. 




Who Created These (by Eliyahu) 


95 


As is well-known, every Partzuf consists of a Rosh, a Guf, and extremities. 
The Rosh decides how much Light the Guf can receive for the Creator’s sake, in 
accordance with the magnitude of the screen that reflects the Light (pleasure). 
The decision to accept this Light causes the Light to descend through the screen, 
from the Rosh to the Guf, filling it from the Peh down to the Tabur. Each Sefira 
of the Rosh fills its corresponding Sefira in the Guf. 


Partzuf in the 1 st Restriction 


Keter 

Hochma 

Bina 

ZA 

Malchut 

5 Parts of the Head 

Mouth 


Keter 



Hochma 



Bina 

5 Parts of the Body 


ZA 



Malchut 

Tabur 


Keter 

Hochma 

Bina 5 Parts of the Extremities 
ZA 

Malchut Feet 


Partzuf in the 2 nd Restriction 


Keter 

Hochma 

2 Parts of the Head 

Mouth 

Bina 

ZA 

Malchut 

Keter 

Hochma 

2 Parts of the Body 

Tabur 


Bina 

ZA 

Malchut 

Keter 

Hochma 

2 Parts of the Extremities 

Feet 



Bina 

ZA 

Malchut 

Parts outside of Partzuf 



























96 


The Zohar 


If there are only two Sefirot K-H in the Rosh, then only the two Sefirot K-H 
remain in the Guf. This is because only they can receive from the corresponding 
Sefirot in the Rosh. Sefirot B-ZA-M of the Rosh receive the same Light as Sefirot K-H 
of the Guf, which means that they are located under the screen ( Malchut that 
ascends and stands under Hochma de Rosh). Thus, the Guf contains K-H that 
receive, accordingly, the Lights Ruach-Nefesh, and AHP of the Rosh that receive 
these two Lights of Ruach-Nefesh, too. 

B-ZA-M (AHP) of the Guf cannot receive the Light from the Rosh, as their 
corresponding Sefirot B-ZA-M of the Rosh do not participate in a Zivug, since they 
lack the strength of the screen sufficient to reflect the egoistic desires of AHP 
de Rosh so as to receive for the Creator’s sake. In other words, since there are 
no AHP in the Rosh, there are also no AHP in the Guf. And since AHP de Guf 
receive no Light from AHP de Rosh, they are like the extremities—the end of a 
Partzuf, below its Tabur. Hence, at the end of a Partzuf, below Tabur, there are GE 
of Raglaim (feet) and AHP de Guf, which fell there. And AHP of Raglaim are not 
parts of a Partzuf whatsoever, as they are located at a lower degree. 

The Light that cannot be received by the Partzuf remains outside, surrounding 
it, and waits until the Partzuf acquires the strength to receive it. It is called 
“Surrounding Light,” and it corresponds to the desires that do not take part in 
a Zivug, those desires that are still uncorrected and lack a screen. 

If, previously, before the second restriction, Malchut (the last Sefira of the 
Guf) was in Tabur, now, when only two Sefirot K-H remain in the Guf, Malchut de 
Guf, too, ascends to Bina de Guf, called Chazeh. Therefore, when Malchut ascends 
to Bina de Rosh, the entire Partzuf “diminishes” in size: the Rosh reaches only up 
to the Eynaim, the Guf only to the Chazeh, and the Raglaim only to Tabur. And 
that is why this state of the Partzuf is called “the state of Katnut.” 

However, if the Partzuf receives new strength from Above, acquires a Masach 
(screen), it will be able to resolve to accept the Light for the Creator’s sake in its 
A HP, then AHP de Rosh will rise again from the Guf to the Rosh, and complete the 
Rosh to ten Sefirot, while the Sefirot of AHP de Guf will ascend from the Raglaim back 
to their place in order to receive additional Light. And then Rosh, Guf, and Raglaim 
will all contain ten Sefirot. This state of the Partzuf is called “the state of Gadlut.” 

In the language of The Zohar, the restriction of a Partzuf, its transition from 
the Gadlut state to the Katnut state is described as a division of each part of the 
Partzuf (Rosh, Guf, and Raglaim) into GE (MI) and AHP (ELEH). All ten Sefirot 
are called by the Creator’s name Elokim, which consists of the letters ELEH- 
IM, that are further divided into MI - GE - K-H and ELEH - B-ZA-M. When 
in Katnut, only Sefirot ELEH maintain their degree, whereas Sefirot IM fall to a 



Who Created These (by Eliyahu) 


97 


lower degree. The word Elokim is read from below upwards, the way they are 
attained by man. 


Partzuf 

in the Big State 


M- 

K 

1 - 

H 

E - 

B 

L- 

ZA 

EH 

-M 


Partzuf 

in the Small State 


M- 

K 


1 ■ 

H 

Parsa 

E 

B 


L- 

ZA 1 

EH 



IN HER HE SHAPED ALL THE CREATURES, AND IN HER 
CONFIRMED ALL THE LAWS—alludes to the division of each degree into two 
parts; their new form signifies the division into ELEH and Ml, the separation 
of the Kelim (desires) of “bestowal” and “reception,” where, due to the lack of 
strength to oppose one’s nature (egoism), part of the Sefirot (desires) remain 
unused, outside of their degree. Accordingly, their Light remains outside as 
Ohr Makif (Surrounding Light), and waits until the Partzuf acquires additional 
strength to become big and thus receive all the Light. 

During the 6,000 years, our entire correction transpires only according to 
the laws of Tzimtzum Bet (second restriction). As soon as the Partzuf acquires new 
strength (M asach) to receive the Light selflessly in Sefirot/Kelim B-ZA-M (ELEH), 
it will immediately attach them to itself and receive in them the Lights Neshama- 
Haya-Yechida. And it will grow to become a big Partzuf consisting of five Kelim 
(ten Sefirot ) with the five Lights of NRNHY. 

14. He confirmed in the sacred and concealed candle (in M alchut that 
merged with Bind), a concealed image, the Holy of Holies, a secret structure 
that emerges from the thought, QAR that is called MI, which is the beginning 
of this structure. It stands and it does not stand; it is great and concealed in 
the name Elokim (ELEH and IM). It is called MI from the word Elokim, 
that is, it lacks the letters ELEH of the name Elokim. He desired to be 
revealed and called by the complete name Elokim, so He clothed Himself 
in a splendid shining garment, the Light of Hassadim. He created ELEH. 
The letters ELEH of the name Elokim ascended and combined with the 
letters MI and formed the complete name Elokim. And until He created 
ELEH, He did not rise (did not ascend) to the name Elokim. Hence, those 
who sinned by worshipping the Golden Calf alluded to this secret by saying, 
“ELEH (this is) your God, Israel!” ( Shemot, 32:4). 










98 


The Zohar 


“ELEH (this is) your God, Israel!”—that is, these egoistic desires (ELEH) are 
your deity, which you must worship until you correct yourself. The use of ELEH 
is the reason for all transgressions and ruin: the breaking of the vessels (Kelim), 
the sin of Adam and the shattering of his soul into 600,000 pieces, worshipping 
the Golden Calf and the breaking of the Tablets by Moshe, the ruin of the First 
and Second Temples, and so forth. 

As a result of the lower ones raising MAN, meaning their request to 
receive the strength necessary to make a Zivug and receive Ohr Hochma for 
the Creator’s sake, there descends from Above the Light called MAD (Mtryin 
Dechurin)-the force that enables the Kli to create a M asach capable of reflecting 
Light, thereby resisting its egoistic nature. This force comes in the form of 
Light, the sensation of the Creator’s greatness, and is referred to as the Light of 
AB-SAG, as it descends from the Partzufim Hochma (AB) and Bina (SAG) of the 
world of AK (Adam Kadmon). 

If one ascends from the degree called “our world” to the worlds BYA, then 
wherever he may be in those worlds, his request for spiritual correction will rise 
through all the worlds and degrees up to PartzufSAG. SAG turns to AB, receives 
the Light of Hochma from it, and passes it down to all the Partzufim along which 
MAN had ascended. 

Since the entire world of AK exists in the first restriction (T zimtzum Aleph) 
and above the second restriction (Tzimtzum Bet), the Light that comes from 
it provides the Kli that receives this Light with the strength to pass from the 
small state to the big one. In other words, the Light of AB-SAG enables the Kli 
to create a M asach, reflect the Light of Hochma, and receive it for the Creator’s 
sake. The Gadlut state is called “the holy of holies,” for being filled with the 
Light of GAR (the holy of holies) is utterly perfect. 

The Light of AB-SAG first descends to the Rosh of Partzuf AA and lowers 
the point ( Malchut) from the thought (Bina) back to its place in the Peh, where 
it was prior to Tzimtzum Bet. In consequence, the three Sefirot B-ZA-M rejoin the 
two Sefirot KH and become five Sefirot in the Rosh, AHP (ELEH) ascend and join 
with GE (MI), and the Creator’s name Elokim is completed. 

However, this does not mean that the Partzuf can be filled with the five 
Lights NRNHY; it merely acquires a M asach, the strength to receive the Light 
in all its ten Sefirot. Since only Ohr Hochma shines in AA, this Light cannot 
fill the elevated Kelim of ELEH, as they can only receive Ohr Hochma if it is 
clothed by Ohr Hassadim. Only the GAR of the Partzuf (K-H-B) can have pure 
Ohr Hochma; the ZAT of the Partzuf (Sefirot ZA-M) can only receive diminished 



Who Created These (by Eliyahu) 


99 


Ohr Hochma— half-mixed with Ohr Hassadim. This is called the reception of Ohr 
Hochma in the middle line (consisting of half Hochma and half Hassadim). 

Therefore, says The Zohar, THIS STRUCTURE STANDS AND IT DOES 
NOT STAND—even though all the Sefirot are already present in the Rosh, 
they still need to be filled with Light, meaning that Sefirot ELEH are not yet 
revealed in the name Elokim. Only the letters MI have so far been revealed 
(filled with the Light). 

Hence, first, the Partzuf makes a Zivug on its Katnut state and receives Ohr 
Hassadim. Then, it clothes Ohr Hochma into PRECIOUS GARMENT ( Ohr 
Hassadim). Only afterwards can the mixed Light of Hassadim and Hochma fill 
Sefirot ZAT (ELEH), and all five Sefirot will shine in perfection. 

However, before MI gives Ohr Hassadim to ELEH so as to enable ELEH 
to receive Ohr Hochma in it, ELEH cannot receive Ohr Hochma, and only the 
Light of MI shines in the entire name Elokim. Further, The Zohar tells us that 
neglect of Ohr Hassadim (the intention for the Creator’s sake) is precisely what 
constitutes the entire transgression. And since they transgressed, i.e., neglected 
Ohr Hassadim, that is, since they did not wish to receive with the intention “for 
the Creator’s sake,” but desired only Ohr Hochma, they caused the separation 
of MI from ELEH. Hence, it is written, ELEH - THIS (the desires of reception 
and not MI, the desires of bestowal) IS YOUR LORD, ISRAEL—and the Light 
instantly passed to the impure forces. 

The Torah does not tell us about the history of an ancient nation, but 
about the structure of the spiritual degrees that we must attain. To know the 
properties of these degrees (whose attainment is designated by the acquisition 
of their properties), Kabbalah explains to us how they were originally created by 
a gradual descent (spiritual coarsening) from the Creator Himself. 

And in order to give us an opportunity to correct our egoism, the Creator 
mixed it with altruism at the very creation of the spiritual degrees. This kind 
of mixing of opposite properties is possible only through an “explosion,” since 
opposite properties cannot be combined otherwise. There were several such 
mixtures that occurred as a result of explosions (breaking of properties). 

One of them is mentioned in the Torah ( Shemot, 32:4), when, by worshiping 
the Golden Calf, the sons of Israel (the altruistic desires of “bestowal”) suddenly 
wished to receive the Light for themselves. Consequently, the Sefirot (Kelim) of 
GE and AHP mixed together, and the properties (desires) of GE penetrated 
AHP. Through these altruistic properties that are secretly concealed within a 
small, egoistic human being, it is possible to awaken him, to evoke in him an 
aspiration to ascend spiritually and to disregard this world. 



100 


The Zohar 


Therefore, everything that is written in the Torah should not be perceived 
by us not as history, but as an instruction manual. All the actions described in 
the Torah are positive: all the devastations, including the ruin of the First and 
the Second Temples, wars, adultery and murder. We only need to realize what 
exactly the Torah is telling us. And one can understand it correctly only if he 
stops perceiving it as a collection of injunctions referring to the mechanical 
performance of commandments. 

15. Just as MI join ELEH into one name Elokim, when Hochma clothes itself 
in Hassadim, so is the name combined by this precious shining garment. 
The world exists thanks to this secret, as is written, “The world was created 
by mercy.” ( Tehilim , 89:3). Then Eliyahu flew away, and I did not see him 
anymore. Yet, it is from him that I discovered that I stood upon the secret and 
its concealment. Rabbi Elazar approached with the others, and they bowed 
down before him. They wept and said, “If we have come into this world 
only to hear this—it is enough for us!” 

Rabbi Shimon continues his explanation: There is only one law of reception 
of Ohr Hochma: Ohr Hochma can only be received if Ohr Hassadim clothes it 
beforehand. Just as this occurs in Partzuf Bina, called “the Upper World,” so 
does it occur in Partzuf Malchut (MA, Nukva of ZA), called “the lower world.” 
Malchut is typically referred to as BON, but when she joins ZA and receives the 
Light from him, she is called by his name—MA. 

The Upper World, Bina of the world of Atzilut, desires only Hassadim, 
but the lower world, Malchut of the world of Atzilut, wants Hochma. However, 
Eliyahu the prophet spoke only of the order of Light and the structure of the 
name Elokim in AVI ( Bina de Atzilut), whereas Rabbi Shimon continues his 
explanation in the next article and describes the structure and reception of 
Light in the name Elokim in Malchut de Atzilut herself. 



The Mother Lends Her Clothes 
to Her Daughter 


16. Heaven, Earth, and all that inhabit them were created by MA, which is 
M alchut, as it is said: “When I behold your Heavens, the work of your hands” 
('Tehilim , 8:4). And before this, it is said, “MA - WHAT (How) majestic Your 
name is throughout the earth, which You established above the Heavens” 
(Tehilim , 8:2). After all, the Heavens were created by the name (property) 
MA (M alchut). It is written “in the Heavens,” which refers to Bind, called 
MI, the Heavens that are above ZA. The explanation for this lies in the name 
Elokim. MA (M alchut) ascends and enters with her properties into Bina, 
i.e., connects into Bina, and receives her properties. Bina is called Elokim. 
After He CREATED LIGHT FOR LIGHT, meaning Ohr (Light) Hassadim 
(called “precious adornments or garments”) so as to clothe Ohr Hochma, 
Ohr Hassadim clothes Ohr Hochma, which signifies the creation of Light for 
Light; by the force of the Supernal Name Elokim (Bina), Malchut ascends, 
and, upon joining Bina, receives all of her properties, and includes herself in 
Bina. Therefore, BERESHEET BARAH ELOKIM (In the beginning the 
Creator created) refers to the Supernal Elokim, to Bina and not to Malchut. 
For MA ( Malchut) is not created by the name MI ELEH. 

The lower world ( Malchut , MA) receives the Light (marked from Above 
by the name Elokim) from Bina. This Light brings Malchut strength, and the 
properties suitable for the creation of Heaven, earth, and posterity manifest 
within her. After all, there cannot be any posterity or birth of new generations 
without the Light of Haya. 

And this is what The Zohar tells us: so does the lower world ( Malchut , MA) 
exist by the name Elokim, by the name from the Upper World, which is why 


101 



102 


The Zohar 


there’s strength in Malchut (O hr Hochma) to create generations. And if Malchut 
has Ohr Hochma, then the world can be created by her. 

(Haya is one type of Ohr Hochma. There is one Light that the Creator 
emanates, or rather, the sensation of the Creator we refer to as Light. This 
sensation depends on the desires-Kelim in which we feel Him. And since there 
are only two types of desires-Kelim, those of “bestowal” and those of “reception,” 
there exist only two types of Light, Hassadim and Hochma. However, each of 
them includes several subtypes, and Ohr Haya constitutes a particular form of 
Ohr Hochma. This is because Hochma is the Light or pleasure that is felt by the 
will “to receive,” whereas Hassadim is the pleasure that is felt by the will “to 
bestow.” If only the Kelim of bestowal (GE) are present in the Partzuf, it is filled 
with Ohr Hassadim ; and if it has the strength to receive for the Creator’s sake, it 
is filled with Ohr Hochma.) (Do not confuse this with MA, which is used here, 
where MA = Malchut with ZA = MA in Gematria). 

The Zohar explains that the Light descends from the name Elokim thanks 
to the merging of MI and ELEH. ZA is called “Heaven.” YESHSUT is above 
Heaven (ZA). There is no MI in Heaven (ZA), only MA. However, after Ohr 
Hassadim clothes Ohr Hochma (the Light ELEH = AHP clothes the Light of MA 
= GE), all the letters combine and ascend by the name Elokim above Heaven = 
ZA = MA to YESHSUT = Bina = MI. 

MI (Bina) is above the second restriction, above its ban, as her properties 
are higher, better than those to which the restriction extends: the property 
of Bina is “not to receive anything,” which is why the ban of the second 
restriction—to not receive—simply does not apply to her, for in her essence, 
she has no desire to receive. 

There remains only the ban of Tzimtzum Aleph, the restriction imposed on 
the reception of Light in Malchut herself ( Malchut de Malchut ), the central point 
of all creation, the only creating being. Malchut herself is egoistic, but if she has 
a Masach and only receives the Light by means of a Zivug de Hakaa (resistance 
to one’s own desire, only for the Creator’s sake) on the desires of bestowal, such 
reception does not occur in Malchut, but rather in the first nine Sefirot. Hence, 
Malchut can receive the Light in her first nine Sefirot. 

In other words, if Malchut has the will (strength) to receive (enjoy) the Light 
(pleasure) not for herself, but only because the Creator so desires, then she 
receives only this amount of Light (pleasure). In order to receive the Light under 
such a condition, Malchut (man’s inclination to pleasure and enjoyment) must 
first reject all incoming pleasure, which Malchut perceives to be right there before 



The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter 


103 


her. This is referred to as the Light’s (the pleasure’s) impact against the screen 
and its reflection off the screen (the reflection of pleasure by force of will so as 
to not receive, in spite of the natural, primordial desire to receive pleasure). 

The reflected pleasure is called Ohr Hassadim. Essentially, this is not a Light, 
but rather Malchut’s intention to receive only for the Creator’s sake. However, 
this intention is that necessary and sufficient condition for the subsequent 
reception of Ohr Hochma from the Creator. For after Malchut repelled all the 
Light (expressed her intention to not receive for her own sake), she thereby 
met the condition of Tzimtzum Aleph (first restriction) to only receive the Light 
of Hochma in the intention for the Creator’s sake, which is called Ohr Hozer 
(Returning Light) or Ohr Hassadim. And now she can receive Ohr Hochma, the 
pleasure that the Creator wants to bestow upon her. 

However, by receiving this Light, Malchut is no more a mere recipient- 
creature. Now, like the Creator, she bestows pleasure upon Him! In this 
manner, the creature attains the degree of the Creator, becomes equal to Him 
in properties, for it wants to bestow everything. This is called “being filled with 
Ohr Hassadim.” Moreover, Malchut receives and enjoys, for if she does not feel 
pleasure, she will not please the Creator. 

Therefore, Malchut receives, meaning she is filled with Ohr Hochma, full of 
wisdom and pleasure, from both bestowal and reception for the Creator’s sake. 
And herein lies the perfection of the Creator’s Creation: she becomes perfect 
and similar to the Creator. And this is the perfection of the Creator’s works: His 
creation can ascend to His level independently! 

One can imagine one’s path from the lows of our world up to the ultimate 
spiritual peak—the Creator—as a passage through a suite of rooms. In all, 
between our state and the Creator there are 125 connected, walkthrough 
rooms. Each room has its own properties, and only those who possess the same 
properties can be there. If, regardless of reason, man changes his properties, 
he is automatically moved as though by an invisible current to a room that 
corresponds to his new properties. 

This is how one can move between these rooms: an infinitesimal inner 
change of properties evokes influence of a spiritual force-field upon man, 
and he immediately moves to his new place of equilibrium, where his inner 
properties completely coincide with the external properties of the spiritual 
field. Hence, there are no guards at the rooms’ entrances/exits; as soon as man 
changes himself so as to match the properties of the next, higher room, he is 
automatically transferred there by the spiritual current or field. 



104 


The Zohar 


What properties must one change in order to move from one room to 
another within this spiritual field? He only needs to alter the type of pleasure 
to which he aspires. We cannot help receiving pleasure, for such is the entire 
material of creation, it is all that was created. However, we can change the object 
of our aspirations, what it is that we wish to enjoy: either coarse reception, 
reception of mere necessities, or the Creator being pleased with us that we 
bestow to Him, that we receive because such is His wish. 

Our “I,” the entity that feels pleasure is present in all of our desires, which 
change ceaselessly in terms of both magnitude and the desired object. This 
“I” never disappears. The only thing of which one should rid himself is the 
sensation that he does something to please this “I.” One should aspire to sense 
the desires of the Creator, how He is pleased with him (just as a mother is 
pleased with her son’s achievements). 

After Malchut decides to receive only for the Creator’s sake, i.e., according 
to the force of her M asach (the force of resistance to her egoistic will to receive 
pleasure), she receives Ohr Hochma only in accordance with the magnitude of 
the Returning Light. Or, conversely, one may say that the magnitude of the 
Returning Light determines man’s willpower and his desire to act for the 
Creator’s sake. 

However, the first nine of Malchut’s ten Sefirot are not egoistic, as they are 
the Creator’s properties with which He wishes to correct Malchut. Only the last 
Sefira of Malchut, Malchut herself, the single creation, called Malchut de Malchut, 
is egoistic and remains under the ban of the first restriction: Ohr Hochma does 
not enter where the will to receive pleasure is present. Therefore, the first nine 
Sefirot can receive the Light of Hochma. 

However, after the second restriction, in order to correct Malchut and impart 
the properties of mercy ( Hassadim ) onto her so she would be able to desire to 
“bestow,” acquire the properties of Bina, and convert her initial, primordial 
egoism into altruism, Malchut ascended to Partzuf Aba, became Malchut in 
PartzufAba in Bina’s place, while Bina found herself below Malchut. Bina herself 
can receive Ohr Hochma without any restrictions, even when below Malchut. 
However, Bina adopted the limitations of Tzimtzum Bet for the sole purpose of 
correcting Malchut. 

Therefore, due to the MAN raised by the lower ones, by man’s requests for 
spiritual correction, the Light AB-SAG descends and lowers Malchut from the 
level of Bina back to her own place: Malchut descends from Bina, and the Light 
of attainment and wisdom is revealed. 




The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter 


105 


As a result ofMalchut’s descent, Bina purifies herself from all restrictions and 
limitations and returns to receiving Ohr Hochma. And after the Ohr Hassadim 
clothes the Ohr Hochma, MI shines in ELEH and the name Elokim is revealed, 
meaning that Ohr Hochma shines. 

The structure of the name Elokim cannot be found in MA, for the lower 
boundary of Heaven (Malchut herself) is limited by Tzimtzum Aleph—the ban 
imposed on the reception of Ohr Hochma, and by Tzimtzum Bet’s 6,000-year long 
prohibition on the usage of the desires of reception. Hence, The Zohar tells us 
that the name Elokim was created with MI, and not with MA, by the property 
received by Malchut upon her ascent to Bina. 

17. But as the letters ELEH descend from Above, from Bina down to Malchut, 
for the mother temporarily lends her clothes to her daughter and adorns her 
with her own adornments, the name Elokim descends from Bina (mother) 
to Malchut (daughter). When does she adorn her with her own adornments? 
When she sees the male essence before her. It is then written of her, “Three 
times in the year shall all your males appear before the Lord Creator” ( Shemot, 
34:23). For Malchut is then called by the male name “Master.” As it is written: 
“Behold the Ark of the Union, the Master of all the earth” (Yehoshua , 3:11). 
The Torah is the Union and the Ark is Malchut, called by the male name 
“Master.” For she received the Kelim (properties, desires) called “clothes,” 
and the Light called “adornments” from her mother, Bina. The letter Hey 
(A from MA) then leaves MA (Mem + Hey) and the letter Yod (I) enters in 
its stead, and just like Bina, Malchut assumes the name MI. And then she 
adorns herself with male clothes, with the clothes of Bina, to accept all the 
husbands of Israel. 

As it is written (item 13), Tzimtzum Bet is in force from the Rosh of AA 
downwards, for Malchut of AA ascended to Bina and created all the lower 
Partzufim of the world of Atzilut in the property of Tzimtzum Bet. Thus, each 
Partzuf of AA, AVI and ZON has only two Sefirot K-H, and three Sefirot B-ZA-M 
separated themselves (their properties) from that degree, and moved to a lower 
one (their properties became equal to it). This is how B-ZA-M ( AHP of Partzuf 
AA) fell to Sefirot K-H (GE) of Partzuf AVI, B-ZA-M (AHP of Partzuf AVI) fell to 
Sefirot K-H (GE) of Partzuf ZON, and B-ZA-M (AHP of Partzuf ZON) fell below 
Parsa to the worlds of BYA. 

Sefirot K-H (GE) that remained in their degree in their Partzuf are called 
MI, and Sefirot B-ZA-M that separated (in their properties) and descended (by 
equivalence in properties) to a lower Partzuf are called ELEH. 



106 


The Zohar 


THE CREATOR 


THE WORLD OFATZILUT 


K 

H 

B 

ZA 

M 

AA (the 1st Restriction is in force above AA) 

K 

H 

AHP of AA fell to GE of AVI 


B 





ZA 

K 

AHP of AVI fell to GE of ZON 


M 

H 





B 





ZA 

K 

AHP of ZON fell to GE of BYA 



M 

H 





B 

r 




ZA 

AHP of BYA fell to the point of our world - in the sensation 




M 

of a person who has attained the level of "our world" 


BUT AS THE LETTERS ELEH DESCEND FROM ABOVE-when Malchut 
is expelled from Bina, die letters ELEH get detached from AVI and fall to ZON 
(a lower degree), and clothe themselves in ZON: ELEH of Aba (YESHS - Israel 
Saba) clothe ZA, and ELEH of Ima (Tvuna) clothe Malchut. Bina of the world of 
Atzilut is a complex Partzuf: her GE constitute AVI (two Partzufim), and her AHP 
have the name of a separate Partzuf YESHS UT, for they fulfill separate functions 
with regard to ZON: Bina: GE = MI = GE of Aba + MI = GE of Ima. ELEH = AHP 
of Aba = YESHS (Israel Saba) + T (Tvuna) = ELEH = AHP of Ima. 

When O hr Haya descends from Above (as a result of which Malchut descends 
from Bina’s level back to her own place), three Sefirot B-ZA-M thereby return to 
their degree, and correspondingly, Sefirot KHB (called the “holy of holies”) enter 
the now complete Partzuf consisting of five Sefirot. (Here, the Light is called by 
the name of the Sefirot it fills.) Previously, there was only O hr Ruach-Nefesh in 
K-H, and now Ohr Neshama-Haya-Yechida was added to KHB, while Ruach-Nefesh 
descended to ZA-M. 

However, when AHP of Rosh de AA (B-ZA-M of Rosh de AA) that fell to its 
Guf ascend (return from Guf to Rosh de AA), the Kelim of GE de AVI ascend 
along with them to Rosh de AA. (These are the Kelim of GE de AVI that were 
clothed in AHP de AA in their small state, when AHP de AA had fallen to GE 
de AVI.) Once there, the Kelim of GE de AVI receive the Light called “holy of 
holies” that shines in Rosh de AA. 



















The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter 


107 


The reason for this is that when the Upper One descends to the lower one, 
it becomes like the lower one. And when the lower one ascends to the Upper 
One it becomes like the Upper One. This is because no space or motion exist in 
the spiritual, and only a change of properties instantly and automatically moves 
a Partzuf or its part in spiritual space, closer (higher) to the Creator or farther 
away (lower) from Him. Therefore, spiritual ascent itself implies a change of 
properties of the lower one to those of the Upper One, and a descent of the 
Upper One signifies that its properties became equal to the properties of the 
degree to which it descended. 

Hence, in Katnut, when Sefirot B-ZA-M = AHP de Rosh of Partzuf AA separate 
from its head and fall (move according to their now inferior properties) to its 
Guf, from Peh to Chazeh, where Partzuf AVI clothes Partzuf AA, they ( B-ZA-M = 
ZON = AHP de Rosh of AA) become like AVI in their properties, without Ohr 
Hochma, and only with the Light of Biria, Hassadim. 

That is why, in Gadlut, when B-ZA-M = AHP de AA return to the Rosh (the 
degree that is higher than Guf), they take with them GE of AVI, as they all became 
one degree while in Katnut. Therefore, in Gadlut, GE of AVI ascend from AHP 
de Rosh of AA to Rosh de AA and become equal to it (in their properties), where 
they receive the Light called “holy of holies” that shines in Rosh de AA. 

ZON ascend to AVI in the same way: after AVI receive the Light in Rosh 
de AA, they acquire strength (screen), and lower Malchut from Bina back to 
her place in Malchut, thereby enabling their Sefirot B-ZA-M = AHP to return to 
their degree, AVI, as in AA. However, when the Kelim-Sefirot B-ZA-M = AHP 
de Bina that were inside K-H = GE de ZON ascend to AVI, they also take with 
them Sefirot of ZON, which they’ve clothed— K-H = GE de ZON. Thus, K-H = 
GE de ZON ascend to AVI and there receive the Light called “holy of holies,” 
the Light of Haya. 

Therefore, it is written that Ima-MOTHER DESCENDS TO HER 
DAUGHTER TO DRESS AND ADORN HER: the letters ELEH or Ima 
(Bina) in her small state descend to Malchut. This means that THE MOTHER 
DESCENDS TO HER DAUGHTER, for the three Sefirot of Ima assumed the 
property of Malchut, thereby separating from Bina and becoming a part of 
Malchut. This is akin to Bina giving part of her Kelim to Malchut. Yet, this gift is 
temporary, as though Bina LENDS, GIVES (these Kelim) FOR TEMPORARY 
USE, and thus, Malchut uses them temporarily. 

And then, Ima-Bina (mother) ADORNS HER DAUGHTER WITH HER 
ADORNMENTS. This is so because in Gadlut, when the three Sefirot ELEH 



108 


The Zohar 


return to Bina, Malchut ascends to the degree of Bina together with them, 
and there receives the Light of “holy of holies.” And since an ascent to Bina 
implies becoming like Bina (in properties), she now has the right to receive the 
same Light as Bina. 

It turns out that, as a result of the mother lowering her Kelim (properties) 
ELEH to her daughter by intentionally assuming the properties (desires) of 
Malchut instead of her own properties (desires), thereby entering the small state 
and willingly diminishing herself, upon receiving the properties of Malchut 
instead of properties of Bina, mother Bina adorned her daughter Malchut with 
her adornments, meaning the Light that subsequently comes in the state of 
Gadlut: the Light of Bina entered Malchut. This is described as “Malchut received 
her adornments.” 

There are two kinds of adornments that the daughter Malchut receives 
from her mother Bina: the first is Ohr Hochma (Ohr Haya, the Light of GAR), 
the Light of perfection, for it imparts the property of perfection to the Kli 
that it is filling, the Light that Malchut receives from Ima (Supernal Mother), 
who stands between Peh and Chazeh of Partzuf AA, above its Parsa. The second 
adornment is Ohr Neshama, which still designates imperfection, as it is received 
from the lower mother, Partzuf of Tvuna that stands between Chazeh and Tabur 
de AA, below its Parsa. 

Naturally, to receive either Light, Malchut must ascend to the corresponding 
degree. In other words, she must change her properties so as to be able to receive, 
to merit that Light. 

When Malchut ascends to Tvuna and receives her adornments from Tvuna, 
these adornments are still imperfect, for Malchut remains with a “question” 
(without the Light of Hochma), as Tvuna was before the raising of MAN. This 
means that to attain perfection, Malchut still needs to receive MAN from the 
lower ones, called the “husbands of Israel.” In this state, the lower ones, called 
the righteous or “the husbands of Israel,” receive the Light from ZA, which 
ascended to YESHS = Israel-Saba. 

However, when Malchut ascends another degree, to the place of the Supernal 
Mother, Bina, above Chazeh de AA, and there receives her adornments from Ima 
and not from Tvuna, then these adornments are perfect, for they contain Ohr 
Haya; there is no more “question” in her, as she is considered a male, bestowing 
Kli, and the husbands of Israel receive from her. 

And all the husbands of Israel appear before her and receive the Light from 
her. And Malchut is CALLED MASTER (Hebrew - Adon). The regular Malchut 



The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter 


109 


is called by die Creator’s female name Adonay (mistress) or AD NI, whereas in 
this state she is called by the male name Adon (master). 

And this is because Malchut no longer has a question, for MAN is no longer 
raised within her, as she has reached perfection (Light of Haya) and is therefore 
called “husband” or master (Adon). Hence, the prophet said: BEHOLD THE 
ARK OF THE COVENANT, THE MASTER (Adon) OF ALL THE EARTH 
(Yehoshua , 3:11). Malchut is called the “Ark,” for ZA, who bestows upon her, 
is called the “Covenant.” The Zohar calls Malchut the “Master of all the earth” 
or “husband.” 

As a result of the letter Hey in the word MA (Mem-Hey), signifying the female 
essence, leaving Malchut, for the letter Hey signifies the presence of a question in 
Malchut, i.e., the absence of O hr Hochma, whereas Ohr Hochma brings absolute 
knowledge, all questions disappear, and with them the letter Hey. The letter Yod 
ascends to the place of Hey, and Malchut assumes the name MI as Ima, which 
signifies Malchut’s reception of the name Elokim, as the name Ima. 

18. Israel receives the last letters (ELEH) from Above, from Bind down to 
that place, i.e., to Malchut, who is now called MI, just like the name Bina. I 
pronounce the letters ELEH and my whole soul weeps so as to receive these 
letters ELEH from Bina into the house of Elokim, which is Malchut. So that 
Malchut would be called Elokim, just as Bina is called Elokim. How can I 
receive them? “With joyous songs of praise sung in the voice of the Torah, and 
festive throngs” ( Tehilim, 42:4). Rabbi Elazar said, “My silence has erected the 
Temple Above, which is Bina, and the Temple below, which is Malchut. Of 
course, as people say, A word is worth a gold coin (Hebrew - Sela), but silence 
is worth two.’ So the words ‘a word is worth a gold coin’ mean that I spoke 
and came to regret it. Silence, my silence, is worth twice as much, for the two 
worlds, Bina and Malchut, were created by this silence. For had I not kept 
silent (see item 11), I would not have attained the unity of both worlds.” 

After Hey has left MA and Yod ascended in her place, thereby forming MI, 
Israel elevates the LAST LETTERS ELEH to Malchut by raising MAN. As we’ve 
already explained, in Katnut, ELEH of the Upper One fell to GE of the lower 
one. Hence, they refer to the lower one in Gadlut as well. For when B-ZA-M = 
ELEH of the Upper One return to its Rosh, they thereby elevate GE of the lower 
one, too. The lower one thus acquires the ELEH of the Upper One and the 
Light with which they filled themselves in their present Gadlut. 

To equalize with the lower one and enter the state of Katnut, the Upper 
One deliberately makes Tzimtzum Bet on its AHP. And upon connecting to the 



110 


The Zohar 


lower one, the Upper One returns to the state of Gadlut, and passes the Light to 
that part of the lower one which they’ve both occupied in the state of Katnut. 

This scenario is similar to one when a good, strong person joins a company 
of wicked men, and connects with them by pretending to be like them. And 
when such contact is established between them, he begins to correct them, 
little by little, precisely through this connection that has formed between 
them beforehand. 

Each Partzuf in the small state is divided into two parts: GE and AHP. 
However, since there is a “column” of Partzufim between our world and the 
Creator, there is a connection between them via the common parts of the upper 
and the lower ones. Precisely because there is a part of an Upper One in each 
lower one, the lower one can receive strength from Above, through this common 
property, and ascend independently up to the Creator Himself. 

Each Upper One that falls to the lower one completes its Kelim to ten Sefirot: 
AHP fall to GE of the lower one, and together they make up ten Sefirot, since 
they stand at the same level. In turn, AHP of the lower one falls into GE of the 
next lower one, and so on. 

Afterwards, in Gadlut, when GE of the Upper One receive the strength to 
attach their AHP to themselves and elevate them, GE of the lower one ascend 
together with AHP, as they were joined below. Therefore, upon ascending, GE of 
the lower one continue to be joined with AHP of the Upper One, and together 
they form a Partzuf of ten Sefirot. 

I PRONOUNCE THE LETTERS ELEH: Israel (one who wishes to receive 
the properties of the Creator) raises MAN (prayer for it) to receive in Malchut 
the Light of Gadlut (for self-correction) with the help of the letters ELEH, Imo- 
Bina. This is achieved by praying near the Gates of Tears, after which no one 
ever returns empty-handed, that is, after raising MAN, ELEH descend from AVI 
to Malchut, the house of Elokim. This is because after receiving ELEH, Malchut 
herself receives the name Elokim, just like Ima. 

A WORD IS WORTH A GOLD COIN, BUT SILENCE IS WORTH 
TWO: the words (spiritual action) of Rabbi Elazar (the spiritual Partzuf of that 
name) elevated Malchut to Tvuna, below Chazeh de AA, where there is still no 
Light of Hochma, which designates the presence of a question in Malchut, a 
request for Ohr Hochma. And this is called “gold” (Hebrew - Sela, a gold coin), 
for that is the name of Malchut. 

However, Rabbi Elazar’s silence enabled Rabbi Shimon to reveal Ohr 
Haya by raising Malchut to the Supernal Mother, whereupon both worlds were 



The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter 


111 


simultaneously created, for the lower world, Malchut, was created together with 
the Upper World, Bina, of which The Zohar speaks: SILENCE IS WORTH 
TWICE (two worlds) AS MUCH. 

19. Rabbi Shimon said, “From here on the perfection of the written is said to 
bring forth their host by number.” For these are two degrees, and each must 
be recorded, that is, noted: one is called ALA and the other MI. MI is the 
Upper One, and MA is the lower one. The Upper Degree registers, speaks, 
and brings forth their hosts by number, where the letter Hey alludes to the 
one that is known and unequaled, namely MI. This is similar to the phrase, 
“HaMotzi Lechem”— He who brings forth bread from the earth (an appeal to 
the Creator), where the letter Hey refers to the knowledge of the known, lower 
degree, namely MA. And together they are one degree, Malchut. However, the 
Upper One is MI de Malchut and the lower one is MA de Malchut, the one 
that brings forth their host by number, for the number 600,000 refers to the 
number of stars that stand together, and they bring forth innumerable hosts. 

The Zohar alludes to the words of the prophet (Y eshayahu, 40:26): “Raise 
your eyes to the height of Heavens and see: WHO HAS CREATED THESE 
(them) - Ml BARAH ELEH? He that brings out their host by number, He calls 
them all by name; no one shall be hidden from the greatness of His might and 
the force of His power.” 

The word “recording” means “marked by the letter Hey,” for two degrees 
must be recorded in Malchut: MI and MA. With the help of the Light that is 
received at the time of ascent above Chazeh de AA to the Upper World, Malchut 
becomes like the upper world and assumes the name MI, for the letter Hey exits 
MA (Mem-Hey), and the letter Yod ascends to its place. Thus, Malchut is called 
Ml, like the Upper World, and is adorned with the male property. 

Nevertheless, MA, the previous degree of Malchut, does not disappear. The 
reason for this is that the degree of MI is essential in order to pass the Light, the 
perfection of the “holy of holies” to the generations, the posterity of Malchut, 
NRN of the righteous, the lower ones. However, the birth and procreation of 
these generations (sons) depend on the name MA. Hence, if either (MA or Ml) 
is missing in Malchut, she will not be able to beget future generations, to create 
new souls (lower Partzufim filled with Light). 

Therefore, Malchut BRINGS OUT THEIR HOST BY NUMBER-this 
is the degree of Ml, which Malchut inherits from the Supernal Mother, for 
the letter Hey before the words “brings out” (MotH = HaMotzi) alludes to the 
fact that Malchut contains the perfect Light, called “adornments,” which she 



112 


The Zohar 


receives from AVI. This is the maximal Light that may fill Malchut during the 
6,000 years. 

The same letter, Hey, designates the presence of the Light of YESHSUT, the 
degree of MA within Malchut. For this degree must also be recorded, be present 
in Malchut. And these two degrees, MI and MA, are present in Malchut: MI 
above and MA below. 

The Zohar calls Malchut the “world being revealed.” That is to say, whatever 
Malchut reveals, the lower ones receive. Those individual attainments, individual 
sensations of the Light that descend from Malchut are what they call “their 
world.” Similarly, whatever we feel in our sensory organs is what we call “our 
world.” But this is nothing more than what we receive from Malchut of the 
lowest degree in the world of Assiya, Malchut of the previous degree. 

However, we should know that the actual notion of “our world” indicates 
the true attainment of the degree called “our world,” i.e., man’s sensation of his 
ultimate disconnection from the Creator, total helplessness, and the realization 
of his absolute egoism. One can attain this sensation only if the spiritual Light 
shines on him from Above, in contrast to which he will see his true spiritual 
state. However, in order to reach such a state, one must make great efforts in the 
study of Kabbalah so as to draw upon himself the influence of the Surrounding 
Light (“Introduction to The Study of Ten Sefirot,” item 155). 

However, when man attains this state, he immediately raises such a request 
to the Creator that his MAN is not left unanswered, and he receives the strength 
to transcend “our world” and ascend with his properties to a Higher Degree— 
Malchut of the world of Assiya. And then it is she that becomes his world. 

Here we are speaking about very high degrees. The Malchut that is being 
revealed is Malchut of the world of Atzilut, Nukva de ZA. And the fact that The 
Zohar calls her “Supernal” indicates the state of Malchut when she attains the 
degree of MI during her ascent and clothing the Upper World, the Supernal 
Mother. Therefore, Malchut herself is then called “Supernal,” and the degree of 
MA is, accordingly, called “lower.” 

KNOWS ALL THE HOSTS BY NUMBER: number designates perfection. 
Light without a number indicates that the Light is imperfect, whereas the Light 
with a number is perfect. The action of ZA with regard to passing the Light from 
Bina to Malchut is described in the phrase: THE HEAVENS TELL OF THE 
CREATOR’S GREATNESS. THE HEAVENS (ZA) TELL (Hebrew-Mesaper, 
from the word Mispar— number, the Light’s perfection). ZA passes this Light 
from AVI to Malchut, called THE CREATOR’S GREATNESS. 



The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter 


113 


This Light is called 600,000, for the degree of Malchut designates units, 
the degree of ZA—tens, the degree of YESHSUT— hundreds, the degree of AVI— 
thousands, the degree of AA—tens of thousands. 

There are two parts in AVI: their own part, where they are regarded as 
thousands, and the part from Ohr Hochma that is received from Rosh de AA, where 
they are regarded as AA, that is, tens of thousands. However, they cannot be 
considered a complete degree of AA, but only as its VAK, for they clothe AA from 
the Peh down to the Chazeh. And since VAK = Vav Ketzavot = 6 Sefirot x 10 = 60, 
the degree of VAK de AA equals 60 x 10,000 = 600,000. 

Therefore, when Malchut ascends to AVI, she receives a complete, perfect 
number—600,000, where 60 signifies that it is merely VAK, for Malchut has 
not yet reached Rosh de AA and that she still lacks this degree. And the degree 
of 10,000 refers to AA, the part that clothes in AVI, for AVI are VAK de AA. 
Therefore, Malchut contains the number 600,000. 

Thus, two degrees are recorded in Malchut: 

- MI, the degree of AVI that clothes in Malchut, through which Malchut 
receives the degree of the Upper World and is called accordingly, 
while the Light in it is called 600,000. 

- MA, the degree of YESHSUT that clothes in Malchut, through which 
Malchut has a question, the sensation of lack of Ohr Hochma, and the 
request for its reception. Malchut is therefore called the “lower world.” 

These two degrees create one Partzuf within Malchut: her part that is above 
the Chazeh is clothed in AVI, and her part that is below the Chazeh is clothed in 
YESHSUT. Therefore, in the generations, in Malchut’s descendants, each Partzuf 
consists of two parts (degrees): from the Upper Part (MI) there is a Light of 
600,000, and from the lower part (lower world, MA), there is an absence of 
number (perfection) in each descendant. 

The phrase, THEY BRING FORTH INNUMERABLE HOSTS is not 
interpreted as infinitely big. Rather, “Innumerable” indicates the imperfection 
of the Light that is received in the lower part, as it comes from YESHSUT, the 
degree that is without a number. 

Malchut’s descendants are therefore defined as imperfect, as these two 
degrees exist in her as one, and are connected as one. Hence, there are two 
degrees in Malchut’s descendants: the Upper One—600,000, and the lower 
one—without a number. However, the lower one is defined as supplement to 
perfection and is not considered a flaw. 



114 


The Zohar 


The reason for this is that the blessing of the seed, propagation depends 
only on the lower world, MA, without a number, as it is said in the Torah that 
Avraham complained that he is childless (Beresheet, 15:5), and the answer was: 
“Look now toward Heaven, and count the stars. Will you be able to count them? 
So shall be your descendants.” From this we see that the blessing of the seed 
comes from the lack of a number, i.e., the name MA. 

Hence, after all the perfection that Malchut attains from the Light of AVI 
(MI), Malchut has an additional blessing from MA, which is called the “lack of 
a number,” and both these degrees are included in her descendants—the souls 
and generations. 

20. All of these 600,000 and all their innumerable hosts, He calls the names. 
What does this mean: “calls the names?” If you say that He calls them by their 
names, it is not so, for then it would have said, “calls by name.” However, 
when this degree does not ascend in the name Elokim, but is called MI, 
it does not beget and does not reveal those that are concealed within it. 
And although they were all concealed within it, meaning that even though 
the letters ELEH have already ascended, the “precious garment” of Ohr 
Hassadim is still concealed. And while it is concealed, it is not called by the 
name Elokim. For He created the letters ELEH and they ascended in His 
Name—clothed themselves in “precious garments” of Ohr Hassadim, as a 
result of which ELEH combine with MI, and are called Elo'im. Then, by 
the power of this name, He brought them forth in perfection, defined as 
CALLS THEIR NAMES, which means that He called by name and brought 
forth every type and species to exist in perfection. Hence, it is said: HE 
BROUGHT FORTH THEIR HOST BY NUMBER—called them all by 
name, that is, by the name Elokim. 

It was already mentioned that the perfection of the Light, which is the 
Creator’s name Elo-im, descends to the souls, generations, descendants, two 
degrees joined in one. This degree includes 600,000 from the Upper Degree, 
and innumerable hosts from the lower, and die Creator’s name descends on 
both of diem. 

The blessing of the seed depends entirely on MA, for it is determined by 
Ohr Hochma, as this Light designates perfection. Whereas die Light without 
a number, Ohr Hassadim, conies precisely from the name MA. As is already 
known, Ohr Hochma is accepted only when clothed in Ohr Hassadim. Until such 
clothing occurs, even though ELEH ascend to MI, die name Elokim (ELOJM = 
ELEH + I M) does not act. 



The Mother Lends Her Clothes to Her Daughter 


115 


Hence, it is written that Ml DOES NOT BEGET (ANY OFFSPRING), 
even though the point of Malchut left the thought ( Bina ) and descended back 
to her place, and all ten Sefirot and the Light returned to the Partzuf, THE 
NAME ELEH IS still CONCEALED, for she still cannot receive Hochma in the 
absence of Hassadim. 

However, BECAUSE HE CREATED ELEH, meaning that after He added a 
Z ivug to the screen of MA (lower world, Malchut), there appeared Ohr Hassadim, 
called WITHOUT A NUMBER. And ELEH were filled with Ohr Hassadim, 
which means BARAH = CREATED ELEH, as clothing in Ohr Hassadim is called 
BARAH (creation). Only after this are they called ELOKI M, for only after the 
reception of Ohr Hassadim can they receive Ohr Hochma, called “the Light of a 
number,” the Light of 600,000, as a result of which, the letters combine and 
form the complete name Elokim. 

The same perfection (clothing of Hochma in Hassadim ) also extends to 
the souls and descendants that emerge from the name Elokim. AND HE IS 
CALLED BY THIS NAME: all that emerges is called by this name, with these 
properties He creates all descendants— Partzufim from His Z ivug on Ohr Hochma. 
THE NAME 600,000 is Hochma, TOGETHER WITH HASSADIM, so that they 
will have the perfection of the name, so that Light will clothe Light, as they are 
clothed in the NAME. It is therefore written: SEE, I CALL THEM BY NAME, 
for “to call” means to revive and bring to perfection. 

21. He asks, “What is the meaning of ‘by the greatness of His might and 
wealth?”’ This is the head of the degree, where all desires ascend and remain 
concealed. The strong one that ascended in the name Elokim, as it is said, 
“This is the secret of the Upper World, called MI.” No man is missing from 
the 600,000 that He created by the power of this name. And because no one 
is missing from these 600,000, it follows that wherever the sons of Israel 
perished and were punished for their transgressions, we subsequently find 
that not one from the 600,000 had disappeared, so that everything would 
remain the same Above and below. And just as no one had disappeared from 
the 600,000 Above, no one has disappeared from this number below. 

FROM THE GREATNESS OF HIS MIGHT AND WEALTH signifies 
Keter de AVI, called the HEAD OF DEGREES. This is Bina of AA, which 
became Keter de Partzuf AVI, WHERE ALL DESIRES ASCEND (MAN of the 
lower ones), and receive all the degrees from there. This degree is filled with 
Ohr Hassadim, and exists in perfection even in the absence of Ohr Hochma, as its 
Light of Hassadim comes from GAR de BINA of AA. In other words, it has such 



116 


The Zohar 


a powerful Light of Hassadim that although this degree emerged from Rosh de 
AA, it is not regarded as having left it, for it feels no need for Ohr Hochma. This 
degree, Keter of AVI, is the Rosh of all the degrees in the world of Atzilut, from 
where AVI, YESHSUT and ZON receive the Light. 

THE STRONG ONE IS THE SECRET OF THE UPPER WORLD, the 
property of MI that is present in Malchut, from where the number 600,000 
descends, for she clothes the Upper World, AVI. Therefore, it is written that 
NO ONE DISAPPEARS FROM THOSE 600,000 because there Malchut 
receives Ohr Hochma, called “600,000.” Hence, it is said that AS NO ONE 
DISAPPEARED ABOVE, SO IT IS BELOW, for Malchut clothes AVI, described 
in the phrase: THE MOTHER ADORNS HER DAUGHTER WITH HER 
OWN ADORNMENTS, by which Malchut becomes completely similar to AVI. 
And just as the Light of AVI is perfect (which is why it is called “600,000” and 
NO ONE HAS DISAPPEARED, i.e., no lack of Ohr Hochma is felt), Malchut is 
perfect in this number, which means NO ONE HAS DISAPPEARED below. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


22. Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba said: “In the first four words of the Torah, IN THE 
BEGINNING THE CREATOR CREATED Et - Beresheet Barah Elokim 
Et, the first two words begin with the letter Bet, and the following two begin 
with Aleph” (The letter Aleph is pronounced both as “A” and “E”). It is said 
that when the Creator thought to create the world, all of the letters were still 
concealed, and even 2,000 years before the creation of the world, the Creator 
gazed into the letters and played with them. 

In the language of Kabbalah, the same sentence appears in the following 
way: when the Creator ( Bina ) decided to create the world (ZON of the world 
of Atzilut), the Kelim of ZON (Zeir Anpin and Nukva) were still in Bina. Hochma 
and Bina (Aba ve Ima - AVI) are called 2,000 years. Before the creation of the 
world (the birth of ZON), all the letters (the Kelim of ZON) existed in AVI in 
the form of MAN, and MAN always stimulates a desire in the Upper One to 
attend to it. 

With regard to the lower Partzuf, the Upper One is called the Creator, 
for it truly begets it, and whatever the lower one receives, comes directly from 
its Upper One. Moreover, one may say that this is all that the Upper One 
desires, its entire existence is meant exclusively for the lower one. Therefore, 
the Upper One always waits for the lower one’s genuine request for the desire 
to ascend spiritually, which is called MAN. Provided this desire is sincere, the 
Upper One immediately responds and passes the powerful Light of correction 
to the lower one. 

Since the lower one is ZON of the world of Atzilut, and all that is below 
this Partzuf (all the worlds of ABYA and our world) is considered a part 
of it, AVI of the world of Atzilut constitute the Upper Partzuf. The desires 
and properties of ZON are called “letters,” and here The Zohar explains the 
properties that ZON (the spiritual worlds and our world, we ourselves) were 


117 



118 


The Zohar 


created with, which properties are desirable, which require correction, and 
how this correction is achieved. 

Since the properties of the future Creature are determined by the 
Creator’s purpose in creating it, it is said that even before the creation of 
the world, the Creator played with the letters. The word “played” suggests 
that the Creator’s interaction with the Creature is like His game with the 
leviathan (the legendary sea monster), with the property that is opposite 
from Him. At the end of correction all the letters unite and combine into 
the one name of the Creator. 

The order of the Hebrew alphabet indicates the descent of the Direct 
Light from Above, the Inner Light that fills the Partzuf. The reverse order of 
the letters from the end of the alphabet alludes to the ascent of the Returning 
Light. The direct order of the alphabet refers to mercy, whereas the reverse 
order—to the strict law and restrictions on using egoistic desires. 

When Adam sinned, the letters detached themselves from him, and only 
the letters Shin and Tav (the Kelim for the Light of VAK of Nefesh) remained in 
him. The Kelim for the Light of Neshama are represented by the letters from 
Aleph to Yod; the letters from Yod to Kuf are the Kelim for the Light of Ruach, and 
the letters Kuf and Reish— the Kelim for GAR of Nefesh— disappeared from him. 

This is why Adam gave his son, born after his sin, the name SHeT (Seth): Shin- 
Tav, according to the two last letters of the alphabet—the Kelim that remained 
in him. The Kli Shin-Tav are only fit for the Returning Light from below 
upwards, but not for the reception of the Upper Light from Above downwards. 
However, after it receives Yesod of Z eirAnpin (the letter Yod), Shin-Tav turns into a 
combination Shin-Yod-Tav. And if the Creator creates the world by the letter Bet, 
it then enters between Shin and Tav and forms the word Shabbat ( Sh-B-T ), the 
state of spiritual perfection, the goal of creation. For this reason, the first word 
in the Torah— Beresheet consists of: Bara (created) Sh(in)-Y(od)-T(av). 

23. When the Creator thought to create the world, all the letters of the alphabet 
came to Him in reverse order from last (Tav) to first (Aleph). The letter Tav 
entered first and said, “Master of the world! It is good, and also seemly of You, 
to create the world with me, with my properties. For I am the seal on Your 
ring, called EmeT (truth), that ends with the letter Tav. And that is why You 
are called truth, and why it would befit the King to begin the universe with 
the letter Tav, and to create the world by her, by her properties.” 

The Creator answered: “You are beautiful and sincere, but do not merit 
the world that I conceived to be created by your properties, since you are 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


119 


destined to be marked on the foreheads of the truly faithful who fulfill all 
of Torah from Aleph to Tav (from the first letter to the last), and perished 
because of you” (Talmud Bavli, Shabbat, 55) 

What does a particular name of the Creator mean? The name of the spiritual 
object indicates the way one can receive the Light that fills it, the way one can 
attain its spiritual degree. Generally speaking, the twenty-two letters are the ten 
Sefirot-Kelim in the Pour (embryonic phase) of the future Partzuf in the Sefira 
Yesod, for that is where the screen of the embryo of the new Partzuf is located. 
That is why Yesod is called a “number,” as it measures the size of a new Partzuf. 

Bearing in mind that each name determines specific spiritual properties 
and states of an object, one can understand what is meant by a change of name, 
place, or action. 

HaVaYaH is the basis of all the letters, but the filling of each letter clarifies the 
letter itself. The filling of a letter is heard as the letter is pronounced. As we read 
the letter Yod in the word HaVaYaH ( Yod-Hey-Vav-Hey ), we actually pronounce 
three sounds (y-o-d); although we write only one letter, the sounds “o-Vav” and 
“d-Dalet” are heard together with the sound “y.” When we say “Hey,” the sound 
“ey”—Yod or “ey”—follows the sound “h.” Therein lies the clarification of the 
name HaVaYaH in the process of its emergence. 

The Creator’s form-properties are revealed in His deeds; hence, the three 
lines in Bina (the Creator) are imprinted and act in His created beings (the lower 
worlds) as a seal and its imprint. Therefore, the name MB exists in Bina, as well 
as in ZA and Malchut. However, in ZA, this name is divided into the ten sayings 
and thirty-two forces of creation of Elokim, which create Malchut, the creature. 

Bina is designated by the letter Mem, Malchut— by Bet; the name MB designates 
the creation of Malchut by Bina. The letter Aleph designates ZA, which passes all 
the twenty-two letters (from Aleph to Tav) to Malchut (Bet). This is why Malchut 
is called ET ( Aleph pronounced as ‘E’-Tav). 

Malchut is the central part of creation and its purpose. She is the only 
creation and includes all the worlds with all that inhabits them, us included. 
Depending on its states, parts of Malchut or Malchut herself (which is one and 
the same) have different properties designated by the different letter combina¬ 
tions. For this reason, Malchut’s parts receive various “codes” (combinations) 
of letters (properties) or names. 

All the words in the world originate here, in Malchut. There is not a 
single property in the world that is not included in Malchut. Each property of 
Malchut, each of the creatures (for all creatures are her parts) is designated by 



120 


The Zohar 


the property that distinguishes it from the others, by the unique set of letters- 
properties that forms its name. 

Malchut is called Shechina (Divinity), as she is filled with the Light, Shochen 
(Dweller—the Creator). The Creator is called Shochen when Malchut feels Him 
as such, within her. If man, being part of Malchut, purifies himself of egoism, 
either partially or completely, and thus fills his corrected desires with the Light 
(the Creator), he becomes part of the Shechina. 

Malchut consists of four parts that are named by their properties (also called 
faces): face of a lion, face of an ox, face of an eagle, and face of a man. Alternately, 
Malchut is likened to a spiritual kernel, surrounded by four shells, which corre¬ 
spond to the four Klipot (impure forces): Ruach Se’ara (Stormy Wind), Arum Gadol 
(Great Cloud), Esh Mitlakachat (Blazing Flame), and Noga (Radiance). 

Kabbalah can describe spiritual actions either as names of Sefirot and 
Partzufim or as names of HaVaYaH, EKYEH, and so forth, with their fillings 
and Gematriot (plural for Gematria— the numeric value). Although the most 
frequently used language is that of Sefirot and Partzufim, sometimes the 
language of HaVaYaH with its fillings can also be applied, even in parallel or 
simultaneously with the former. 

Most Kabbalistic terms are composite: Maatzil (the Creator) comes from the 
word T zel (shadow), as the Creature emerges from the Creator’s concealment, 
from His restrictions. Another name for the Creator is Boreh (combination of 
Bo— come and Re’eh— see). 

A name denotes attainment. Upon attaining an object, man gives it a 
name. Similarly, man gives a name to the Creator according to the property 
that he attains, depending on how he feels the Creator. There are several 
kinds of names to the Creator, based on His properties. For example, the 
Creator’s name EMET—“Truth” is based on the sensations of His Light within 
the Partzuf. 

Below are the names of the Creator with the corresponding names of 
the Sefirot: 

- Keter: Aleph-Hey-Yod-Hey (EKYEH) 

- Hochma: Yod-Hey (YA) 

- Bina: HaVaYaH with the punctuation Segol-Holam-Hirik, as Elokim: Yod 

(Yod-Vav-Dalet) - Hey (Hey-Yod) - Vav (Vav-Aleph-Vav) - Hey ( Hey-Yod). 

- Hesed: Aleph-Lamed = EL (pronounced KEL) 

- Qevura: Aleph-Lamed-Hey-Yod-Mem ( ELOKIM ) 




The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


121 


- Tifferet: Yod-Hey-Vav-Hey (HaVaYaH without punctuation) 

- Netzah: HaVaYaH TZEVAOT 

- Hod: ELOKIM TZEVAOT 

- Yesod: Shin-Dalet-Yod = SHADDAY 

- Malchut: ADO NAY (pronounced ADNI) 

Merging the two worlds, the Upper and the lower, is designated by the 
words HaVaYaH-ADNl, implying the ascent of Malchut-ADNI to the level of 
Bina-HaVaYaH with the punctuation of Elokim. 

The name ZA of HaVaYaH comes from the right line ( Hesed ), and the name 
ADNI, from the left line (Gevura). Joining of these two lines forms the middle 
line, where the Light of Hochma shines on account of the presence of the Light 
of Hassadim from the right line. Such state is designated by a combination of the 
two names HaVaYaH-ADNI: 

YOD-Aleph-HEY-Dalet-VAV-Nun-HEY-Yod. The union (Z ivug) of ZA and his 
Nukva is designated by mixing the two names. 

HaVaYaH-ADNI: Yod-Aleph-Hey-Dalet-Vav-Nun-Hey-Yod. The opening Yod 
indicates the Light of Hochma in ZA, the Yod at the end refers to the passing of 
this Light to Nukva. 

As a result of the second restriction, Malchut ascended to Bina, and governs 
Bina and ZA with her desire. Since it is impossible to receive the Light of Hochma 
in the three Sefirot—Bina, ZA, and Malchut, which are governed by Malchut’s 
egoistic desire, the Light of Hochma is absent in the Partzuf, and only the Light 
of Hassadim is present. 

This is designated in the following way: the letter Yod enters the word Light 
(O hr contains the letters Aleph-Vav-Reish, signifying the Light of Hochma), and 
forms the word Avir (air, containing the letters Aleph-Vav-Yod-Reish), signifying 
the Light of Hassadim. If the Partzuf returns to the Gadlut state, the letter Yod 
exits it, and it is refilled with the Light of Hochma. Consequently, Avir (air) 
becomes Ohr (Light). 

Unfilled HaVaYaH designates Partzuf Keter. HaVaYaH with the filling of 
AB (72) designates Partzuf Hochma (AA). HaVaYaH with the filling of SAG (63) 
designates Partzuf Bina (AVI). Together, these three HaVaYaH form MB (42) 
letters—the sacred name of the Light that corrects the souls by its influence on 
the Kli, the screen. 

All that was created is the desire to receive pleasure, which we call “creature.” 
Only this desire was created, and nothing else. All the worlds and all that inhabits 




122 


The Zohar 


them, our world with everything within it, are but degrees of the desire to 
receive pleasure. The intensity of the desire determines its place in the spiritual 
realm, where all creation and our world—as its lowest point—are located. Man’s 
actual location (the world, his spiritual degree) determines the particular kind 
of pleasure he desires, how he chooses to enjoy. 

In order for the creature to emerge from the Creator, the Light emanating 
from Him must descend through four stages, whereas the fifth stage already 
perceives itself as a separate and independent (from the Creator) desire to enjoy 
precisely the Light emanating from the Creator. 

Upon emerging from the Creator—a result of a sequential emanation of 
His Light—the desire to receive pleasure (Kli-vessel) also consists of five parts 
designated by the letters: the tip of the Yod, Yod, Hey, Vav, Hey. These five parts 
(four letters) are called the Creator’s name HaVaYaH, because the Kli gives the 
Creator a name according to its sensation of Him, according to its sensation of 
the Light that fills it. The Light that fills the Kli is called “filling.” 

The Kli created by the Creator is divided into five parts, called “worlds.” 
Each world is in turn divided into five more parts, called Partzufim (faces). Then, 
each Partzuf (singular for Partzufim) consists of five parts called Sefirot. In all, 
there are 5 x 5 x 5 = 125 spiritual objects or degrees from the lowest degree to 
the Creator Himself. 

Each Partzuf consists of five parts (Sefirot), designated by a dot and four 
letters: JCeter-dot + Hochma-Yod + Bina-Hey + ZA-Vav + Malchut-Hey = HaVaYaH. 
The difference between each of the 125 Partzufim lies in the type of Light that fills 
them, whereas the core of the Kli, the letters HaVaYaH, remain the same. A desire 
cannot appear unless the Creator’s Light had previously passed through the five 
stages; only the fifth stage is considered a birth of a new creation (desire). 

The whole universe (all the worlds) is nothing but the ten Sefirot or the 
Creator’s name HaVaYaH. 


SEFIRA 

LETTER 

PARTZUF 

WORLD 

LIGHT 

Keter 

A dot, the tip of the letter Yod 

Galgalta 

AK 

Yechida 

Hochma 

Yod 

AB 

Atzilut 

Haya 

Bina 

Hey 

SAG 

Beria 

Neshama 

ZA 

Vav 

MA 

Yetzira 

Ruach 

Malchut 

Hey 

BON 

Assiya 

Nefesh 








The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


123 


A filling of HaVaYaH with Light is referred to as its revelation. Thus, the 
letters emerge from the state of concealment when they are not filled. In all there 
are five Partzufim: Keter ( Galgalta ), AB, SAG, MA and BON. The first— Partzuf 
Keter—is the main one and the source of all the rest. Its ten Sefirot is plain (inner) 
HaVaYaH, for each of the four letters of its HaVaYaH comes outside, revealing 
a new Partzuf that clothes it. 

So then, out of Partzuf Keter-Galgalta, from the letter Yod comes Partzuf 
Hochma (AB), from the letter Hey—Partzuf Bina (SAG), from the letter Vav— 
Partzuf ZA (MA), and from the letter Hey—Partzuf Malchut (BON). Thus Partzuf 
Keter is designated by plain HaVaYaH, and the Partzufim that clothe it are 
designated by filled HaVaYaH. The recording of HaVaYaH with the Light 
that fills it is called Miluy (filling). For the purposes of brevity when naming 
a Partzuf, the notion of Gematria was introduced. Gematria is the numerical 
value of the Light that fills the Partzuf. 

Wisdom ( Hochma ) is called calculation (Heshbon), Gematria. A calculation 
is made only in a place where Light is received: (i) a preliminary calculation is 
made as to how much Light the Partzuf can receive for the Creator’s sake; (ii) 
the Light is received in accordance with the calculation; (iii) calculation of the 
received amount, called Miluy, Gematria. 

Malchut cannot receive the Light of Hochma without the Light of Hassadim, 
and in that event, Hochma cannot shine in her. Then Malchut ascends to Bina 
and becomes like an embryo inside of her, by which she receives the right 
line—Hassadim. Upon joining the past and the present states, Malchut receives 
Hochma into Hassadim, and the Light of Hochma shines in her. All these actions 
of Malchut are accompanied by calculations, called Gematriot. 

The Gematria (numerical value) of the Partzuf unfilled with the Light, the 
Gematria of the empty HaVaYaH is as follows: 

HaVaYaH = Yod + Hey + Vav + Hey =10 + 5 + 6 + 5 = 26. The Gematria of a 
filled HaVaYaH is formed by filling each letter; In Hebrew, each letter has a full 
name: A-Aleph, B-Bet, etc.. Hence, there are four kinds of fillings in HaVaYaH: 
1) AB, 2) SAG, 3) MA and 4) BON. 

1) HaVaYaH with the filling of AB: 

Yod: Yod + Vav + Dalet = 10 + 6 + 4 = 20 
Hey: Hey + Yod = 5 + 10 = 15 

Vav. Vav + Yod + Vav = 6 + 10 + 6 = 22 
Hey: Hey + Yod = 5 + 10 = 15 



124 


The Zohar 


In all: 20 + 15 + 22 + 15 = 72 = AB, where “A” designates the letter Ayin = 70, 
and not Aleph = 1. HaVaYaH filled with this Light is called Partzuf AB (Partzuf 
Hochma), for the letter Yod with its filling signifies the Light of Wisdom, Ohr 
Hochma. Such a filling is called “HaVaYaH with the filling of Yod.” 

2) HaVaYaH with the filling of SAG: the Partzuf that is filled with Light of 
Mercy, O hr Hassadim, is called SAG, for its Gematria is this: 

SAG = Samech (60) + Gimel (3) = 63: 

Yod: Yod + Vdt' + Dalet = 10 + 6 + 4 = 20 

Hey: Hey + Yod = 5 + 10 = 15 

Vat/: Vat/ + Aleph + Vat’ = 6 + 1+ 6 = 13 

Hey: Hey + Yod = 5 + 10 = 15 

In all: 20 + 15 + 13 + 15 = 63 = Samech + Gimel = SAG 

If the Kelim and their filling originate from the first restriction, the letter 
Yod is present in the filling of HaVaYaH. And if the Kelim are filled with the 
Light of the second restriction, it is the letter Aleph, present in the filling of 
HaVaYaH. The difference between the Gematriot of AB and SAG lies in the 
filling of the letter Vav: Gematria of Vav in Partzuf AB is twenty-two (from the 
filling of Ohr Hochma ), whereas Gematria of Vav in Partzuf SAG is thirteen (from 
the filling of Ohr Hassadim). From the aforesaid, it is clear that Partzuf AB 
originates from the first restriction, whereas the letter Vav (Z A) in Partzuf SAG 
originates from the second restriction. 

3) HaVaYaH with the filling of MA: 

Yod: Yod + Vav + Dalet = 20 

Hey. Hey + Aleph = 6 
Vav. Vav + Aleph + Vav = 13 
Hey. Hey + Aleph = 6 

Such a filling of HaVaYaH is called 20 + 6 + 13 + 6 = 45 = Mem (40) + Hey (5) = 
MA (the letter Hey is pronounced as “ah”). 

4) HaVaYaH with the filling of BON: 

Yod: Yod + Vav + Dalet = 20 

Hey. Hey + Hey = 10 
Vav. Vav + Vav = 12 
Hey. Hey + Hey = 10 

Such a filling of HaVaYaH is called 20 + 10 + 12 + 10 = 52 = Nun (50) + 
Bet (2), pronounced as BON for easier articulation. This is the Gematria of 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


125 


Partzuf Malchut, and it is equivalent to twice the value of the unfilled HaVaYaH: 
HaVaYaH = 26, and 26 x 2 = 52 = MA. 

Partzuf Malchut cannot receive the Creator’s Light due to the absence of a 
screen. Instead, it can only passively receive what Partzuf ZA gives it. Hence, the 
twofold twenty-six indicates that whatever Malchut has comes to her from ZA. 

From the four kinds of HaVaYaH, it becomes clear that the root of creation 
is neither Partzuf Hochma nor Bina, but only ZA, as it is the first Partzuf built on 
the second restriction. 

The primary ten Sefirot are located in Partzuf Keter, whereas Partzufim AB, 
SAG, MA, and BON are merely branches stemming from the first Partzuf. 
However, when the Light spreads within the Partzuf, it contains five inner 
Lights NRNHY and five outer Lights. The five outer Lights of Bina come out 
of the right ear, and the five inner Lights of Bina come out of the left. The five 
outer Lights of ZA come out of the right nostril, and the five inner Lights of 
ZA come out of the left. 

Since the two Malchuyot (plural for Malchut ) are remote from one another, 
as a branch in our world, man’s ear holes are also separated and distanced. The 
two nostrils are separated by a smaller distance, whereas the five inner and outer 
Lights of the common Light of the Peh (mouth) come out of the same opening. 
Thus, as they exit the mouth, they collide and interweave, and as a result of their 
collisions, letters ( Kelim ) are born. 

Since twenty-two letters originate from Bina-SAG = Samech + Gimel = 60 + 
3 = 63, the opening through which they come out is called 63 + 22 = 85 = Peh + 
Hey = PeH (mouth). The letters come out of the Peh of ZA, for Yesod of Ima is 
located there. 

We received our entire Torah, all of the knowledge about the spiritual 
worlds, from our Great Patriarchs, who ascended spiritually above our world, 
sensed the Upper Worlds, and described them to us. This is how we received the 
whole Torah—both the written and the oral parts. 

We cannot imagine the spiritual world because our sensory organs cannot 
detect it. Thus, to describe the objects and concepts still unattainable by us, 
Kabbalists use several techniques, languages. The whole Torah speaks only 
of the creation, governing, and correction of the world; never about history, 
geography, or anything else. As it is said in the Torah itself, the Torah is the 
sacred names, that is, manifestations of the Creator, the degrees and methods 
of His attainment. 



126 


The Zohar 


Kabbalists, those who ascend to the spiritual world and thus establish direct 
contact with the Creator, convey this information to us using four languages: 

1. The language of the TaNaKh (Torah—Pentateuch, Nevi’im— Proph¬ 
ets, Ketuvim— Writings/Hagiographa). This is the language of the 
written Torah. 

2. The language of laws. 

3. The language of legends. 

4. The language of Sefirot and Partzufim— the language of Kabbalah. 

All the languages speak about the same thing—the attainment of the Creator 
by us, those living in this world. For this is the sole purpose of our creation, and 
according to the Creator’s design, we must devote all of our physical, mental, 
and spiritual abilities only to it. And if we were to aspire only to this, we would 
naturally use our language only for this purpose. After all, everything that is 
given to us is only for the fulfillment of this exclusive goal—the attainment of the 
sensation of the Creator, while still in this life. 

And this is why the first language mastered by humankind was Hebrew. 
However, as they distanced from fulfilling their mission, humankind conceived 
other languages. All the other languages in the world have their inner meaning, 
too, but since their alphabets were not revealed to us by Kabbalists, we study the 
spiritual forces depicted in the Hebrew alphabet, the source of all the others. 

Every Partzuf is divided into two parts: right and left. The right part consists of 
Ramach = Reish - Mem - Chet = 248 parts (organs) filled with the Light of Hassadim; 
and the left part consists of Shasah = Shin - Samech - Hey = 365 parts (tendons) 
filled with the Light of Hochma. ZA is called a “voice”; he is generally the Light of 
Hassadim. But when he joins with Malchut, called “speech,” Malchut receives the 
Light of Hassadim with Hochma from ZA, and thus “speech” is formed. 

The seven primary Sefirot of ZA are called “Seven Heavens.” The seventy 
names of ZA originate from the 70 (7 x 10) Sefirot of ZA. ZA himself is called 
“Heaven” and Malchut is called “earth.” The Sefirot of ZA are also called Ruach, 
owing to the Light of Ruach within them, which ascends to Bina (ears) and 
transforms into sound: Hochma in the left ear and Hassadim in the right. 

There is a difference between language and alphabet, as in our world there 
are people who can speak, but cannot read or write. The most ancient spoken 
language is that of the TaNaKh, which dates back to Adam. The language of laws 
originated from it, followed by the language of legends. All of these languages 
combined and each of them in particular are used in our holy scriptures. 

The language of Kabbalah was the last to develop. It is the most difficult 
language, since proper understanding of it requires sensing the spiritual categories 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


127 


that this language narrates. Kabbalah is also the most precise language of all. It is 
the only language that can accurately render all the spiritual information. 

However, only through direct study with a Kabbalist-teacher can a student 
learn it and grasp its information. And since for many generations there 
were only a few Kabbalists, unconnected with one another, the language of 
Kabbalah was the last to evolve. Even today it can only be “learned” directly 
from a Kabbalist-teacher. 

Initially, Kabbalists enciphered their knowledge of the spiritual world as 
letters, whose outlines reflected the interrelationships of spiritual forces. In 
other words, each spiritual degree is characterized by a unique interrelationship 
of spiritual forces. By assigning each spiritual property with a particular symbol, 
one can depict the interrelationship, as well as the general product of the union 
of spiritual forces of each degree, i.e., its essence. 

Thus, Kabbalists created the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The 
Zohar pays much attention to analyzing the connection between the letters, which 
helps a student to synthesize his knowledge and find new ways of discovering 
spiritual forces and their actions within. 

As our forefather Avraham writes in his Book of Creation (Sefer Yetzira), letters 
represent the stones from which the building-word is constructed. As our sages 
tell us, the world was created with the letters of the “sacred language,” each letter 
representing a certain holy, spiritual, altruistic force of creation. 

The properties of this force are reflected in the letter’s outline, its 
importance with regard to other letters, its potential combinations with the 
others, its potential punctuation marks, its crowns and notations, its numerical 
value (Gematria) and variations. 

However, this only concerns separate letters and their combinations. There 
are also certain rules that enable us to determine the properties of spiritual 
forces not from letters, but from whole words. Moreover, quite often we can 
replace letters or even parts of a word with similar ones. 

The language itself, the roots of its words, indicate the properties of the 
spiritual object they describe. For example, Adam originated from Adama— earth, 
which emphasizes his insignificance, and from the word Adameh— similar (to the 
Upper One), which emphasizes his eminence. The name Yaakov comes from the 
word Ekev— to get around (Esau). There are many such examples in the Torah, for 
everything is named after its root, as after the patronymic name of one’s father. 

Once we have established that certain combinations of letters ( Kelim , 
language of letters) can be used instead of the language of Sefirot and Partzufim 




128 


The Zohar 


when describing spiritual actions, the entire description of the spiritual worlds 
amounts to portraying objects and actions in the form of letters and their 
combinations. This is how the whole of the Torah is written, in words. Thus, 

a) The shape of each letter and the elements of its structure indicate 
all the properties and the general state of a spiritual object, Sefira, or 
Partzuf, which this particular letter depicts; 

b) The order of letters in a word indicates the connection between 
spiritual objects, Sefirot, and their shared properties and actions. 
Attainment of a word's spiritual meaning signifies an ascent to the 
spiritual level of the object. When that happens, he who attains 
it becomes this very word, assumes its name. Man’s name keeps 
changing as he ascends the spiritual degrees; it is determined by 
the degree he is on, as he assumes the name of that degree. It is 
therefore said that everyone can become like Moshe, i.e., attain the 
degree called “Moshe”; 

c) The word itself in its “corporeal” reading, its “corporeal” meaning 
indicates the spiritual root and its branch—consequence in our world; 

d) A combination of words indicates an entire spiritual process, which, 
as a rule, has a corresponding action (commandment) in our world. 

Names change depending on the aspect that requires clarification: 

a) By elements of Sefirot: 

Keter - has none 
Hochma - fire 
Bina - water 
ZA - air 
Malchut - earth 


b) By colors: 

Keter - has none 

Hochma - white - the basis of all colors 

Bina - red - most prominent 

ZA - green - most perfect 

Malchut - black - cannot be changed by any other color 


The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


129 


Colors are present only in the Guf (body) of the Partzuf, but never in the 
Rosh (head). These colors are projected onto Malchut from Above, and she passes 
them on to all the lower ones. 

c) By lines: 

Hesed - right - white 

Gevura - left - red 

Tifferet - central, includes all the colors - green 

Quite often, colors and elements are used instead of the names of Sefirot 
and their properties: fire, water, air, earth (The Zohar, Vayera, item 32). Malchut 
is called “earth,” but Malchut that ascends with her properties to Bina is called 
“earth of the Temple.” In the Temple, the four sides of the world— Hochma, Bina, 
Tifferet and Malchut join the four elements of the world—fire, water, air and 
earth. Out of the two points of Bina and Malchut, which are joined together, the 
Creator made one Partzuf— Adam. 

The four foundations of the world, or the four sides of the world: 


Fire 

North 

Shuruk 

Left Line 

Gevura 

Air 

East 

Hirik 

Middle Line 

Tifferet 

Water 

South 

Holam 

Right Line 

Hesed 

Earth 

West 

- 

- 

Malchut - receives from all 


Four fundamental metals are created as a result of a Zivug of the four 
foundations with Malchut: gold, silver, copper and iron. All of these names, as 
well as many others, are used in the Torah instead of the names of the ten Sefirot. 
Therefore, although the languages of the Torah, legends, the Talmud, and the 
Scriptures are extraordinarily vivid, only the concise language of Kabbalah 
provides an accurate description of the spiritual worlds. 

The four kinds of symbols used with letters: 

Taamim —tone modulations used in pronouncing letters—signify the Direct 
Light, which spreads from Above downwards in the body of the Partzuf. 

Nekudot —letter punctuation marks—signify the Light during its gradual exit 
from the body of the Partzuf from below upwards. 

Tagin —crowns above the letters—represent Reshimot (reminiscences/records) 
of the previously present Light (Taamim). Tagin originate from GAR de Bina. 







130 


The Zohar 


Otiot— letters—represent Reshimot of the Light’s exit from the body of the 
Partzuf (Nekudot ). Letters originate from Zat de Bina. 

The ten Sefirot are divided into three primary parts—Taamim, Nekudot, 
and Otiot: 

Taamim - Keter 

Nekudot - Hochma 

Otiot - ZAT de Bina and ZON 

According to the Light in them, Sefirot are divided into: 

Taamim - Hochma 
Nekudot - Bina 
Otiot - ZON 

The letters were created in the following order: the letter Aleph, which was 
initially on the right side, begot the letter Shin, which emerged from it and 
moved to the left side. The letter Shin consists of three sides: the left, the middle, 
and the right. The letter Vav is thereby formed by three letters, and upon joining 
with Aleph, it formed the word A leph-Shin = ESH (fire) in the left side. 

Out of the interaction of the right and the left sides these two letters came 
forth in contradiction between them, as the right line includes water, while the 
left line includes fire. Their collisions begot the letters Reish, Vav, and Chet, 
which formed the word Ruach (wind). This wind entered between the two sides 
(fire and water) and joined them together, thereby establishing the order of the 
first letters and their perfection. 

At first, The Zohar offers a general description of the three lines in ZA, 
designated by the three names of the Creator: El, Elokim and Elokeinu, and then 
proceeds to clarify the descent of the degrees of filling ZA and Malchut with 
the Light of Hochma in the form of letter combinations, in the order of the 
degrees’ descent from Above downwards. Mayim - water, Esh - fire, Ruach - 
wind constitute the three lines in ZA from AVI. This is why the first letters in 
ZA come from AVI. 

Then the following combinations emerged: Aleph revealed Mem from its 
right side, so Mem stands to the left line of Aleph. Mem revealed Shin as the 
middle line, as Mem initially consists of the left line, for it exists in the form of a 
concealed letter Mem in the word Elokim, which pertains to the left line, and so 
forth. This is how all the letters of the Hebrew alphabet were born. 


The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


131 


THE LETTERS 

OF THE HEBREW ALPHABET 


LETTERS 

NAME 

PRONUNCIATION 

GEMATRIA 

N 

Aleph 

[a], [e] 

1 

3 

Bet 

b, v 

2 


Gimel 

g 

3 

7 

Dalet 

d 

4 

n 

Hey 

[a], [e] 

5 

i 

Vav 

v, [u], [o] 

6 

T 

Zayin 

z 

7 

n 

Chet 

h 

8 

ID 

Tet 

t 

9 

*9 

Yod 

y, i 

10 

(1)3 

Chaf 

h, k 

20 

*7 

Lamed 

1 

30 

(0)8 

Mem 

m 

40 

0)1 

Nun 

n 

50 

D 

Samech 

s 

60 

V 

Ayin 

[a], [e] 

70 

(n)s 

Peh 

p, ph 

80 

(r)x 

Tzadik 

tz 

90 

p 

Kuf 

k 

100 

n 

Reish 

r 

200 


Shin 

sh, s 

300 

n 

Tav 

t 

400 






132 


The Zohar 


The letters Al eph and A; yin do not have any particular sound, and only 
the accompanying punctuation mark determines their pronunciation. 

The letters Bet, Chaf and P eh with a dot inside them are pronounced 
as “b,” “k,” and “p.” The absence of a dot changes their pronunciation to 
“v,” “ch” and “f.” 

The letter Hey is not pronounced, but rather aspirated. 

The shapes of the letters Mem, Nun, Tzadik, Peh, Chaf (pronounced 
MANTZEPACH) change when placed at the end of a word, as seen in the 
table of letters. 

The shape, external form of letters: the protruding element of a letter indicates 
that the Light in this part of the letter is greater than in the other. The filling 
(Miluy ) indicates the height of the degree. A punctuation mark (Nikud) indicates 
the origin of each part of the Partzuf: whether it came from the Upper Partzuf (and 
constitutes its part in the present one), from the lower Partzuf, or from itself. 

The Kelim-Sefirot themselves are called “letters,” and their punctuation 
marks (Nekudot) indicate the Light that enters and exits them. The Light of Bina, 
ZA, and Malchut can enter the Kelim, but the Light of Keter or Hochma cannot. 
A dot above a letter ( Holam ) signifies the Lights Keter and Hochma, which never 
clothe the Kli, hence the location of the dot above the letter. 

Two horizontally positioned dots (T \ere) allude to Sefirot Hochma and Bina, 
that Bina does not receive the Light of Hochma, and contains only the Light of 
Hassadim, the Light of Mercy (AVI back-to-back). Bina herself is also called T zere, 
for ZA receives everything from her. If there is a third dot (Segol) between these 
two dots, it means that ZA raised his request for the Light of Hochma to AVI. 
Such a request of ZA in AVI is called Daat. Daat receives the Light of Hochma 
in order to pass it on to ZA. The punctuation mark Kama tz (a “T” shaped mark 
under the letter) indicates that ZA collects (Mekabetz) the Light of Hochma. 

A dot indicates Malchut with a reflecting screen, but not a receiving one. 
Such a form testifies to the absence of Light in the Kli; it is merely a black dot, 
as the law of restriction rules over it. 

The Sefira Hod is an inclusion of Malchut’s properties into ZA, out of which 
ZA makes a whole Partzuf Malchut. The letter Hey in the word Hod signifies Keter 
in Malchut, and the nine lower Sefirot of Malchut are located among the impure 
forces that cling to them. This is designated by an elongated leg of the letter Kuf 
(dipping below the line), which indicates that the impure forces receive their 
strength from the spiritually pure forces through this element, the Kuf. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


133 


The white background is a plain, indistinguishable and thereby imperceptible 
Light (by us). Whatever we can distinguish may only be expressed by restricting 
the diffusion of this white color. The forms and degrees of its restriction are 
called letters. That is why we see black outlines on white background, and attain 
only the black restrictions. 

We can describe the diffusion of Light in the worlds using attraction and 
restriction of the Light. And these two forces must act simultaneously. Similarly, 
when we perceive something in our sensory organs, we only sense it by way of 
restriction, as the object’s surface or a light wave collides with our sensory organ, 
which restricts its expansion, and can thereby perceive it. 

The spiritual roots of the forms are as follows: A circumference originates 
from the first restriction of the Light in the world of Ein So/ (Infinity), the 
first restriction on the diffusion of Light. Since this restriction was equal and 
uniform, it assumed the form of a circumference. 

A vertical line, length without width, signifies that the notion is unattainable 
by us, and is therefore called a “thin line” of the diffusion of the Light of Hochma. 
The Light of Hochma can only be received with the help of the screen in Malchut, 
which creates Returning Light that clothes the Light of Hochma. Therefore, the 
Upper Light that comes to the Kli is called a line. 

A horizontal line, width without height: when a vertical line—the diffusion 
of the Light of Hochma from Above downwards—collides with the screen, their 
collision (of desires) compels the vertical line to shift into the horizontal line (to 
the right), resulting in a shape of the English letter L. Its width is determined by the 
force of the Returning Light that ascends from the screen from below upwards. 

A rectangle is formed by the interlacing of the descending Light of Hochma 
and the Returning Light: five vertical descending lines—five Sefirot of the Light 
of Hochma and five horizontal lines from right to left—five Sefirot of the Light 
of Hassadim. The size of the rectangle’s side is called Amah, consisting of five 
parts—T efachim (plural for Tefach). (Both Amah and Tefach are distance measuring 
units.) This is why we describe the Kli as a rectangle. 

The two kinds of diffusion of Light, the Light of Hochma and the Returning 
Light, are called the right and the left cheeks, respectively, which turn into the 
upper and the lower lips. Since, after the first restriction, the Light may not be 
received in Malchut, the Returning Light is only received in four parts of the Kli, 
not in five. This is why there are 4 x 4 = 16 teeth on the lower jaw and 16 teeth 
on the upper jaw (The Returning Light stems from resistance, from “chewing” 
the Light before receiving it inside). 



134 


The Zohar 


In the second restriction, a Triangle is formed, as Malchut ascends to Bina 
and forms a slanted line. Thus the combination of the Direct Light with the 
Returning Light and restrictions beget various spiritual forms. 

The Light of Hassadim is defined as “protruding,” for a protrusion beyond 
the limits of a spiritual body means that: 

1) The Light is so great that it comes out by elevating, protruding 
the limits; 

2) It originates from the middle line, T ifferet. 

A cavity in the body occurs due to the following reasons: 

1) The Light is insufficient; the Light cannot shine there; 

2) The Light of Hochma is present, but the lack of Hassadim prevents it 
from shining. 

PUNCTUATION MARKS 
IN THE HEBREW ALPHABET 
(NEKUDOT) 


Sefira 

Punctuation Mark 

Pronunciation 

Keter 

Kamatz 

□ 

~r 

a 

Hochma 

Patach 

□ 

a 

Bina 

Segol 

□ 

e 

Hesed 

Tzere 

□ 

e 

Gevura 

Shva 

□ 

- 

Tifferet 

Holam 

□ 

0 

Netzah 

Hirik 

□ 

i 

Hod 

Kubutz 

□ 

\ 

u 

Yesod 

Shuruk 


u 

Malchut 

No Mark 

□ 

- 


Nekudot are defined by three lines: 

IN THE ROSH (HEAD) 

Kamatz - Keter - right line 
Patach - Hochma - left line 
Tzere - Bina - middle line 

Holam - Tifferet - middle line 






The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


135 


IN THE GUF (BODY) 

Segol - Hesed - right line 

Shva - Gevura - left line 

Shuruk - Tifferet - middle line 

IN THE EXTREMITIES 
Hirik - Netzah - right line 

Kubutz - Hod - left line 

- Malchut - middle line (has no designation) 

The levels of Nekudot: 

Above the letters - Light of Neshama 
In the letters - Light of Ruach 
Under the letters - Light of Nefesh 

Zivug de Nekudot is the Zivug between Hochma de Aba and Hochma de Ima. 

Zivug de Otiot is the Zivug between Bina de Aba and Bina de Ima. 

The letters combined together designate Returning Light during the screen’s 
ascent from Tabur to Peh. They are combined, for they all ascend to their root, 
which unites everything, whereas the use of the will to receive, even for the 
Creator’s sake, causes separation. 

A state of separated letters occurs when the Light enters the Kli (vessel, die 
letters of HaVaYaH); the four letters thereby separate, since die Light makes 
a distinction between die Sefirot: depending on their different properties, it 
clothes in them in different ways. 

HaVaYaH with filling Aleph comes on a screen with Aviut Aleph (thickness 
one), HaVaYaH with filling Hey conies on a screen with Aviut Bet (thickness 
two). A plain name refers to Aviut Shoresh (zero thickness) with the Light of 
Nefesh. Plain letters refer to a Partzuf with a screen of Aviut Aleph. 

The truly faithful, who believe in the three fundamentals: the Creator, His 
Providence and the Torah, need the two lines to be in constant balance for their 
spiritual advancement. The left line is wisdom, the Light of Hochma that enters 
the desire to receive, which pertains to the left side, and the right line is faith, 
the Light of Hassadim (mercy), the altruistic desire to bestow. 

Existing in knowledge only means that man is under the rule of the 
impure forces ( Klipa ) of the left side, which renders him totally unable to 
feel the spiritual, leaving him in spiritual darkness. Alternately, existing only 
in faith means that man is under the rule of the impure forces (Klipa) of the 
right side that convinces him that he has achieved perfection, that there is 


136 


The Zohar 


nothing else to work on, nothing to correct within him. This, too, denies him 
the opportunity to advance. 

The Zohar continues: And the Creator answered further (the letter Tav): 
“The word MaveT (death) ends with you. And since these are your properties, 
you are not suitable for Me to create the world with you.” Immediately following, 
the letter T,av departed from Him. 

The moment the Creator set about creating the world-ZON by selecting 
their properties, all twenty-two letters of ZON appeared before Him, starting 
from the last—' Tav, and ending with the first, Aleph— the head of all letters. The 
reason for the letters coming in reverse order is that they constitute the MAN 
of ZON, the Kelim of ZON, which emerge from below upwards. The usual 
alphabetical order corresponds to the Light (MAD), which descends from 
Above downwards. But the order of MAN is opposite to that of MAD, for it 
ascends from below upwards. 

Letters are none other than desires, properties, and thoughts that, in man’s 
opinion, are suitable for the attainment of the spiritual, the Creator, of His 
Providence. Man skips from one thought to another: one moment he thinks that 
it is possible to attain the Upper Worlds with one property, next he believes he 
can enter the spiritual realms by mastering another property, then he begins to 
stubbornly observe all the commandments and pray zealously, or disregards all 
the actions and plunges into contemplation and reading. Sometimes he craves 
only knowledge, and sometimes only faith, right down to fanaticism. 

Just as there are two extremes in our world—knowledge and faith, in the 
spiritual world, as man now consciously ascends the spiritual ladder to the 
Creator, there is spiritual work in the attainment of knowledge and faith. 
Hence, Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag’s commentary on The Zohar is entitled The 
Sulam (The Ladder). 

Each of the twenty-two Hebrew letters represents a certain property. At times 
it seems that the property of the letter Tav is suitable for the attainment of the 
spiritual; at times he believes that some other letter is more appropriate. This 
occurs because in the process of his spiritual ascent, man begins to increasingly 
understand the true Goal of creation and the Creator, which is exactly what is 
demanded of him. 

Thus, he continues to sort through it all, until his search yields the truth: 
only with the help of the letter Bet, which stands at the beginning of the word 
Berachah (blessing)—contact with the Creator,—only with the help of this force 
can one achieve the goal. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


137 


Therefore, The Zohar tells us how the letters—properties, forces, and desires— 
come to the Creator. By offering up his prayer (MAN), man asks for some 
property that seems like a real goal to him. And each letter tries to prove that 
it is best suited for the attainment of the sensation of the Creator and merging 
with Him. But the Creator shows that the best and the only letter is Bet, as only 
it can help man to establish contact with Him. This is why the Torah begins 
with this letter. 

The description of the spiritual forces designated by each letter is incredibly 
deep, and in order to attain full clarity we need to bridge several other preliminary 
explanations: the creation of the world includes its existence and process of 
perfection so that the world could attain the goal for which it was created. 

The Creator created the world consisting of two contrasting forces; against 
each pure, altruistic force, He created an impure, egoistic one, which is its equal 
and opposite. Just as there are four pure worlds ABYA, the Creator created 
opposite them four impure worlds ABYA. 

Therefore, in our world—the last degree of the world of Assiya —a spiritually 
evolved person that senses the Creator and has entered with his properties into 
the spiritually pure world, looks no different from an egoistic and spiritually 
undeveloped person, who has not attained the spiritual realm. This means that 
one who does not perceive the spiritual is totally unable to differentiate between 
spiritual purity and impurity. 

We see that in our world one cannot advance with the help of the pure 
forces. On the contrary, it is his egoistic aspirations that provide man with the 
strength to conquer everything in the world. How often do we see fervent fanatics 
immersed in their impure desires to capture for themselves both this world and 
the next, whereas one that aspires to the Creator has no strength for even a 
slightest spiritual movement! In our world there is no proof or confirmation 
that man advances on the right path. And under no circumstances should one 
draw conclusions based on one’s life experience or “common sense.” 

So how can a person in this world exist and advance towards the Goal of 
creation if he is unable to tell good from bad, pure from impure? There is one 
sign by which one can distinguish purity from impurity: impure forces bear 
no spiritual fruit. Thus, those that advance through the impure worlds ABYA 
do not attain anything spiritual, whereas those who are connected to the pure 
forces reap spiritual fruit on their path. 

As it is explained in the “Introduction to The Study of Ten Sefirot” (items 
19-23), if man advances along the right path, he attains the secrets of the Torah in 




138 


The Zohar 


three to five years. The Creator helps those who wish to acquire altruistic desires 
over and above their own requests, and thus one attains the desired goal. From 
below, man aspires to the Creator with his small desire (MAN), and from Above, 
the Creator pours onto him tremendous spiritual desires and strength (MAD). 

This is the only opportunity to check whether or not the path that one 
is on is correct, whether it leads to altruism or to even bigger egoism. By no 
means can one consider his well-being, soaring elation, his happiness and 
success in life as proofs of correct advancement. It is precisely in those states 
of feeling perfection, well-being, and contentment that he must ask himself: 
“Have I attained the secrets of the Torah?” And until he has attained them, his 
“perfection” is impure. 

Man should always strive for the middle line—a balance of faith and 
knowledge—in the following three notions: the Creator, His Providence, and 
the Torah. And under no circumstances should he advance by either faith or 
knowledge alone. If he only wants to attain the Creator, His Providence or the 
Torah, he enters spiritual darkness, for it is impossible to receive the Light of 
Wisdom (Ohr Hochma ) without the Light of Mercy (Ohr Hassadim). 

Such a state is referred to as the left impure force, “Klipat Esau.” And if man 
strives to advance through faith alone, he enters the impure force of the right 
side, “Klipat Yishmael,” which tells him he is in a state of perfection. In this case, 
he sees no point in his work and is thus unable to continue to advance. 

In other words, even if one is full of joy, which is exactly what the Torah 
urges him to feel (to perceive the Creator’s Providence with joy, for joy signifies 
justification of creation, understanding that His Providence is always just and 
kind), unless he has attained the secrets of the Torah, his path is considered 
erroneous, as he lacks the intention “for the Creator’s sake,” which reveals the 
secrets of the Torah. 

This article explains the particular properties of the Hebrew letters—how all 
the letters come before the Creator, each asking Him to create the world with its 
property. Each of the twenty-two letters represents a spiritual degree in the worlds 
ABYA, and each believes that its pure spiritual properties are most suitable for 
the task, that by attaining its degree and acquiring its properties, the inhabitants 
of the world will be able to elevate the pure forces over the impure ones, so much 
so that they will reach the end of correction, the Goal of creation. 

However, the Creator answers each letter that against it are the corresponding 
impure forces, and therefore man will be unable to properly separate the pure 
forces from the impure ones, and afterwards, utilize the pure forces to achieve 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


139 


the goal. This occurrence repeats itself until the appearance of the letter Bet, 
which represents the degree called “the Creator’s blessing,” against which there 
are no impure forces of any kind. 

And the Creator consented to create the world with the letter Bet, with its 
property; for it has no impure counterpart, only Bet presents an opportunity 
to carry out an analysis between good and evil, to determine when man works 
for himself and when he works for the Creator’s sake. Therefore, only by its 
force, by its property can the world exist: so as to extract from the “mixture” 
of one’s desires only what’s pure, and elevate them above the impure, down to 
complete eradication of the latter, and the consequent attainment of complete 
correction of one’s nature. 

As it follows from The Zohar, only the Creator’s help, called “a blessing,” is 
the force of man’s salvation, the only thing capable of freeing him from the rule 
of the impure forces. And this force, called “blessing,” descends only upon those 
that advance along the right path. 

The right path is a combination of three conditions: (i) one’s efforts in 
studying (only!) genuine Kabbalistic sources; (ii) contact with a true Kabbalist, 
whom he accepts as his teacher; and (iii) contact with like-minded people, who 
seek spiritual elevation. A more detailed explanation will be provided to serious 
students only. 

All twenty-two letters are divided into three degrees: Bina, Zeir Anpin (ZA), 
and Malchut, since there are no Kelim (letters) above Bina. Twenty-two letters in 
Bina are called “big,” twenty-two letters in ZA are called “medium,” and twenty- 
two letters in Malchut are called “small.” 

Each of the three Sefirot of Bina, ZA, and Malchut are further divided into 
three degrees: The twenty-two letters of Bina contain their own Bina, ZA, and 
Malchut. Likewise, ZA has his own ten Sefirot, in which his Bina, ZA, and Malchut 
also contain twenty-two letters. The same applies to Malchut. 

The twenty-two letters of each degree are divided into three types. The letters 
from Aleph to Tet (1-9) are considered units; these are the nine Sefirot of Bina. 
The letters from Yod to T zadik (10-90) are considered tens; these are the nine 
Sefirot of ZA. And finally, the four letters Kuf, Reish, Shin and Tav (100-400) are 
considered hundreds; and these are the four Sefirot of Malchut, since Malchut is 
located below and downwards of Chazeh de ZA, which corresponds in height to 
the four Sefirot of ZA. 

Bina, units, big letters, nine letters: Aleph, Bet, Gimel, Dale t, Hey, Vav, 
Zayin, Chet, Tet. 




140 


The Zohar 


ZA, tens, medium letters, nine letters: Yod, Chaf, Lamed, Mem, Nun, Samech, 
Ayin, Peh, Tzadik. 

Malchut, hundreds, small letters, four letters: Kuf, Reish, Shin, Tav. 

However, it is known that units are in Malchut, tens are in ZA, and hundreds 
are in Bina, which contradicts the aforesaid that units are in Bina, tens are in 
ZA, and hundreds are in Malchut. Such inverse dependence is caused by the 
inverse relationship between the Lights and the Kelim: the lowest Light enters 
the Highest Kelim. The Upper Kelim are the first to emerge, from Keter down to 
Malchut (Keter, Hochma, Bina, ZA, and Malchut ), whereas the first to enter them 
is the smallest Light, Nefesh, followed by Ruach, Neshama, Haya and Yechida. 

Therefore, if there are only units in the Kelim, from Aleph to Tet, then only 
the Light of Nefesh is present. And if tens are added to the Kelim, the Light of 
Ruach appears, and if hundreds are added to the Kelim, the Light of Neshama 
fills them. 

This is why hundreds are defined as Bina, tens as ZA, and units as Malchut. 
However, with regard to the Kelim, the order is inversed: units are in Bina, tens 
are in ZA, and hundreds are in Malchut. 

Bina: Light (100) - Kelim (1) 

ZA: Light (10) - Kelim (10) 

Malchut: Light (1) - Kelim (100) 

The letters descend from Bina to ZA and from there to Malchut. When they 
descend from Bina to ZA, they descend as three lines: 22/3 = 7 letters in each, with 
the remaining letter being added to the middle line. These twenty-two letters de¬ 
scend in three lines to Malchut, which consists of five final letters MANTZEPACH, 
thereby bringing the total number in Malchut to 22 + 5 = 27 letters. 

The middle line is called “Heaven,” “firmament.” Therefore, when The 
Zohar speaks of letters in the firmament, it means that the two middle lines, 
7 + 7 = 14 = Yod + Dalet = Yad (hand) writes all the twenty-two letters in the 
firmament (ZA) through the middle line. That is how one should interpret the 
words of the Torah regarding the letters that appear in the sky or having seen the 
hand that writes the letters in the sky. 

The twenty-two letters of the Torah are the Kelim to be filled by the Light 
of NRN. Units—from Aleph to Yod—are the Kli intended for the Light of Bina 
(Neshama). Tens—from Yod to Kuf— are the Kli meant for the Light of ZA (Ruach). 
Hundreds—from Kuf to Tav—are the Kli for the Light of Malchut (Nefesh). 


The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


141 


Letters are the Kelim, into which the Light clothes; in all, there are twenty- 
two special properties, and thus twenty-two symbols of their description, 
called letters. Just as the combinations of the twenty-two letters suffice for the 
description of all existing knowledge, the various couplings, unions (Z ivugim of 
Sefirot) of the twenty-two Kelim, properties, desires of the Partzuf are sufficient 
for receiving and bestowing Light, fulfilling all spiritual actions and bringing all 
the letters (man’s desires) to correction. 

Letters represent the various correlations of ZO N: 

a) ZA, consisting of six parts of his extremities, husband to Malchut, 
designated by the letter Vav, Sefira Yesod— level of an embryo; 

b) ZA designated by the letter Vav, Sefira Tifferet, consisting of six parts of 
his hands—level of nursing; 

c) ZA that stands between AVI, while Nukva must ascend to him, thereby 
reaching the level of reception of Ohr Hochma. 

d) ZA, the letter Vav, above him are ten Sefirot Keter-Hochma, below him 
are ten Sefirot Bina-Tifferet-Malchut—and together they make up the 
letter Aleph. And the final corrected state will come when Malchut 
ascends to Keter of ZA (the Upper Yod in the letter Aleph) at the end 
of correction. When Malchut ascends above Parsa (Vav), she receives 
the Light herself, whereas when she descends below Vav, she receives 
from ZA. As Malchut ascends, she forms Taamim (tone marks), when 
she descends, she is called Nekuda (point), and when she merges with 
ZA, she is referred to as a point inside Vav (Shuruk). 

The order of A TBaSH: There is a special combination of letters, e.g. the 
first with the last (‘A’ through ‘T’), the second with the second last (‘B’ through 
‘Sh’), etc., which designate the conditions for diffusion of the Upper Light from 
Above downwards. 

MANTZEPACH: All the worlds and Partzufim were created with the 
twenty-two letters of Malchut. The screen is located in the head of the Partzuf, 
preventing the Light from entering. It repels the Light, calculates how much it 
can receive for the Creator’s sake, and only then accepts it. 

Each of the five levels of the will to receive that exist in Malchut, in the Guf 
of the Partzuf, has a corresponding restriction in the screen, located in the Peh, 
to prevent the Light from entering the body. Therefore, the screen in the Peh 
consists of five parts, forces. 



142 


The Zohar 


These five restrictive forces of the screen, five exertions of the screen are 
designated by the five final letters of the alphabet: Mem-Nun-Tzadik-Peh-Chaf 
(abbreviated as MANTZEPACH). They are called “final letters” because they 
are written only at the end of words. These forces determine the reception 
of Light in the body of the Partzuf, and therefore beget the other twenty-two 
letters (Kelim, corrected desires, which receive the Light). Although the five 
letters MANTZEPACH are only found at the end of words, in oral speech they 
represent the five groups of pronunciation of the twenty-two letters. And the 
letters MANTZEPACH stand at the head of each group. 

Out of the five letters MANTZEPACH originate five groups of sounds: 

1. Peh-Keter: a group of four sounds-letters emerges from the throat; they are 
called AChHA—Aleph-Chet-Hey-Ayin. Aleph is the Light of Partzuf Keter of Atzilut, 
concealed from the lower ones and called Atik. Chet is the Light of Partzuf Hochma 
of the world of Atzilut, called Arich Anpin and also concealed from the lower 
ones. Hey is the Light of Partzuf Bina of the world of Atzilut, called Ima (mother), 
who receives the Light of Hochma from Aba (father) in order to pass it on to her 
children (ZON). Ayin is the Light of Zeir Anpin’s face. Since the Light of ZA that 
enters Malchut is called “the Torah,” it is said that the Torah has Ayin (70) faces, 
that the Creator (ZA) has Ayin (70) names. After all, with regard to Malchut, ZA is 
the Creator. Therefore, seventy souls descended to Egypt, and so forth. 

2. Chaf-Hochma: a group of four sounds-letters emerges from the palate; 
they are called GIChiK—Gimel-Yod-Chaf-Kuf. The letters AChHA transfer the 
Light to the letters GIChiK: Aleph passes the Light to Gimel, which carries reward 
(Gemul—Gimel) for the righteous. Chet passes the Light of Hochma to Yod, but this 
Light is concealed. Hey illuminates Chaf with the Light of Bina, which carries 
joy. Ayin illuminates Kuf. Just as Ayin = 70, as it consists of seven Sefirot, Hesed- 
Gevura-Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod-Malchut, each containing ten Sefirot of its own, 
Kuf = 100, as it consists of ten Sefirot from Keter to Malchut, each consisting of 
its own ten. Hence, the palate fully complements the throat. 

3. Nun-Bina: a group of four sounds-letters emerges from the tongue, called 
DaTLaT—Dalet-Tet-Lamed-Nun-Tav. 

4. Mem-ZA: a group of four sounds-letters emerges from the lips, called 
BOMoCH-Bet-Vav-Mem-Chaf. 

5. Tzadik-Malchut: a group of four sounds-letters emerges from the teeth, 
called ZaSSHRaTZ - Zayin-Samech-Shin-Reish-Tzadik. 

Voice and speech: Voice is formed in ZA, speech—in Malchut. If he who 
is righteous, and who exists in the worlds BYA, raises his prayers (MAN) to 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


143 


Malchut of the world of Atzilut, he causes ZON to ascend to AVI, and unites 
them in a constant Zivug so as to assure the Light’s descent to the lower ones. 
ZON receives the Light from AVI; this Light is called “voice” and “speech,” 
and this is the power of the righteous—to create the pure and destroy the 
impure with their voice. 

Man’s speech is conceived in the lungs: as the air exits the lungs and 
reaches the mouth, it turns to voice, and as it leaves the mouth, it becomes 
speech. Two lips accept the voice from the two parts of the lungs (the left and 
the right) and turn it into speech. Each lung consists of five parts so as to 
pass to the five parts in the mouth: to the guttural letters AChHA, the labial 
letters BOMoCH, the palatal letters GIChiK, the lingual letters DaTLaT and 
the dental letters ZaSSHRaTZ. 

The seven primary Sefirot of ZA are called “Seven Heavens.” The seventy 
names of ZA originate from the seventy (7 x 10) Sefirot of ZA. ZA himself is 
called “Heaven,” and Malchut is called “earth.” The Sefirot of ZA are also known 
as Ruach (because of the Light of Ruach in them), which ascends to Bina (ears), 
where it turns to sound, with Hochma in the left ear and Hassadim in the right. 


THE LETTER TAV 

Each of the twenty-two letters corresponds to a particular spiritual degree, on 
which it acts. The letter itself is that spiritual degree. Hence, the letter Tav claims 
that its properties are the most suitable for the creation of the world, that its 
properties can bring the world to correction and to the goal of creation, for it 
defines the property of “truth,” the Creator’s seal. 

The impure forces exist solely on account of the miniature Light received 
from the pure forces; this Light is called Ner Dakik (tiny candle). Without this 
Light, the impure forces would neither be able to exist nor to function—tempting 
man with the pleasures they received from the tiny spark of Light that fell from 
the pure Sefirot. Therefore, the last, lowest pure degree lets a little bit of the 
Upper Light down to the impure forces. 

Without the support of the pure forces, the impure forces would instantly 
disappear. A question arises: who needs them to exist and what for? Obviously, 
the impure forces were created on a par with pure ones by the Creator Himself, 
for there is no other power in the entire universe besides Him. 

It was necessary to create impure forces in order to concentrate them in 
the enormous desires to receive pleasure, in immense egoism. The system of 



144 


The Zohar 


the impure worlds of ABYA serves as a kind of storehouse of desires to receive 
pleasure, from which, to the extent of his correction, man can take more and 
more new desires so as to correct them. Thus, by attaching uncorrected impure 
forces to himself and correcting them, man can gradually ascend higher and 
higher, up to the level of the Creator. For this purpose the Creator created 
impure forces and sustains them through the system of pure ones. 

The impure system of the worlds ABYA exists on the same level, parallel to 
the pure one. Our world is located under these two spiritual systems. Our world 
is also called egoistic and impure, but its forces and desires are so insignificant 
that they are located below the worlds of the impure ABYA. 

When, with the help of Kabbalah, one surmounts the level of our world’s 
egoism, he enters the pure world of Assiya. And immediately after, the impure 
world of Assiya begins to influence him, tempting him with its false pleasures. 
By overcoming the temptations of the impure world of Assiya, one ascends 
spiritually. But until one surmounts the impure desires of his body, of our 
world, he will not begin to sense, or enter the spiritual worlds, for he would not 
be able to withstand the impure forces that act there. 

Unlike the forces that act in the spiritual world, man in our world is only 
influenced by the small egoistic force called his “body,” his ego. Man can struggle 
with this force, either winning or losing his battles. But even if he is defeated, 
man retains that tiny spark of Light (Ner Dakik), which sustains his existence. 

Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag gives the following example: man’s work in this world 
resembles writing on a school blackboard, where any mistake may be wiped off 
without harming the writer, where he can make corrections and write anew, 
until he learns to write correctly. Only when he learns to write correctly is he 
allowed to enter the spiritual realm. 

Therefore, our world is the most insignificant of all. Everyone must begin 
here, and everyone is bound to return here, and be born again and again until 
he crosses the boundary between our world and the spiritual one. (There are 
many additional conditions required for the soul to not descend to this world 
anymore, and those who will merit, will understand). 

Hence, the vertical line, the leg of the letter Kuf, descends below the writing 
line, which signifies the Light descending through this letter down to the impure 
forces. And no other letter descends below the writing line, like the Kuf does. 

For the impure forces to exist (any creature, whether pure or impure, can 
only exist by receiving Light), the last, lowest degree of pure forces descends into 
the impure forces and gives them the Light necessary for their existence and 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


145 


realization of their role: to entice man with their pleasures and convince him to 
act according to the law of the impure forces. 

At first, the left leg of the letter Tav also descended below the writing line. 
But the Creator saw that the impure forces would then be too closely connected 
to pure ones, so He severed this connection and returned the left leg of the 
letter Tav back to the writing line, to the level of the pure forces. 

As a result of this shortening, the left leg of the Tav doubled in thickness, 
as it folded in two, and no Light passes to the impure forces anymore. On the 
contrary, it even becomes the Creator’s seal by holding the impure forces at bay 
and preventing them from stealing the Upper Light, for as soon as any impure 
forces touch it, they instantly die. 

And all the life-force necessary for the sustenance of the impure forces is 
passed by the Creator through the letter Kuf, because, being the first letter of 
Malchut, it is remote from them; thus, there is no fear or risk that its connection 
to the impure forces would become too strong. 

Malchut consists of only four letters from Above downwards: Kuf, Reish, 
Shin, and Tav. Kuf is the first, Tav is the last, and below it are the impure 
forces. Therefore, if they receive the Light they need according to the thought 
of creation from Kuf, the furthest letter from them, the impure forces have 
no way of “stealing” more Light than Malchut, who consists of four letters, is 
obliged to give them. 

This is why this letter is called Kuf, to show that it gives strength to the 
impure system of ABYA—a fake (nonexistent) man, just as a monkey (Kof in 
Hebrew) resembles a human being. 

And it misleads people by pretending to be the truth and claiming that its 
path leads to the attainment of spirituality, the Creator, Lishma, the sensation 
of the Creator. However, the pure forces maintain that only with the help of the 
Torah can man attain adequate correction of his properties so as to merge them 
with the Creator. 

And this is what the letter Tav claimed: because it is the Creator’s seal of 
truth, it stands at the end of the pure system and does not allow the impure 
forces to cling to pure ones, and pose as if they are pure. This is why its 
properties are worthy of becoming the basis for the creation of the world—so 
that via the analysis of good and evil, purity and impurity, inhabitants of this 
world may be sure that by acquiring its properties they will achieve the goal 
of their creation. 



146 


The Zohar 


The four letters Kuf-Reish-Shin-Tav make up the four Sefirot of Malchut of the 
world of Atzilut: Keter-Hochma-Bina-Tifferet, where Tifferet consists of six Sefirot— 
Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod. But when the letter Kuf is by itself, without 
Reish-Shin-Tav, the Torah, which spreads to the worlds BYA, also shines upon the 
impure forces, and the angel of death receives the strength to destroy all that 
lives. This state is designated by the letter Kuf. But when Malchut is corrected, 
she is designated by the letter Hey, whose difference from Kuf lies in the long leg 
of the Kuf (Malchut de Malchut). 

This long left leg, which turns the Hey into Kuf, indicates that the Light 
descends from the pure forces ( Partzufim ) to the impure worlds of BYA, the 
impure forces referred to as death. And when Malchut joins with Bina and 
receives the strength from Bina to ascend and receive the Light, the other letters 
join Malchut, and she draws the Light of life from Bina. 

In this state, the left leg of the Kuf is reduced in half, turning the Kuf into 
Tav, whose left leg is twice as thick, due to its shortening. The part of Malchut 
that passed Light to the impure forces now ascended out of them, hence there 
are two kinds of Malchut: Miftacha (key)—the part that joined with Bina, and 
Man’ula (lock)—the part that ascended out of the impure forces. 

These two parts of Malchut manifest in different ways: Miftacha— openly and 
Man’ula— secretly. Two paths of bringing man to correction emerge from them: 
the good path of the Torah and the path of suffering. 

However, after Malchut corrects her properties and joins with Bina, she no 
longer parts from Bina, but, upon receiving Light from her, Malchut pours it 
onto the worlds, and the impure forces lose their strength to sow death and rule 
over the world. And if a case arises where a sinner must be punished, the impure 
forces must first receive permission to punish him, for without permission they 
may not reveal the Man’ula. 

Thus, after Malchut joins with Bina, thereby correcting her properties, the 
impure forces are no longer free to rule the world, unless they are permitted. 
The reason for this is the letter Tet, the last letter of Bina, which sends the Light 
of life to all with the help of the Miftacha. After Malchut joins with Bina, she 
becomes a Miftacha, and does not let go of this connection. Respectively, the 
impure forces, the leg of the letter Kuf, can no longer sow death. 

Three places emerge from this: (i) where only the properties of the letter 
Tet rule by shining with the Light of life of this world; (ii) the entire world after 
Malchut joins with Bina, defined as Miftacha, when the letter Tet shines upon 
all, but permits the punishment of sinners according to the rule: “You advance 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


147 


towards the goal either by the path of the Torah or by the path of suffering”; (iii) 
hell, the place of eternal punishment by the letter Kuf, in contrast with the first 
place, ruled by the letter Tet, where life is eternally prosperous. 

All the letters with all their secret properties, described by those who 
understand them, are located in the Temple. All the Upper and lower worlds 
are created and function in the framework of their laws-properties, and the 
Supernal Name, the Creator’s name HaVaYaH rules over all. 

The Mishkan (tabernacle) in the Temple was also designed with the help of 
letters, for its builder, Betzalel, knew how to join the letters that made Heaven 
and earth. And since he was unique in possessing this wisdom, he was entrusted 
with the building of the sanctuary. 

As the Creator chose Betzalel Above, so He wished him to be chosen below, 
as He said to Moshe Above: “Choose Betzalel.” So Moshe said to his people 
below: “The Creator has chosen Betzalel.” For such was Betzalel’s name-property 
(Be Tzel El)—“In the Creator’s shadow.” 

The Creator is called ZA or the Sefira Tifferet in Partzuf ZA, which shines 
upon the Sefira Yesod, called Tzadik (righteous one). Betzalel is called Yesod, 
which receives the Light of VAK— an incomplete Light—from Tifferet, which is 
hence called “sitting in the shadow,” and, in turn, shining into Malchut. Thus, 
like Tifferet, the Sefira Yesod that passes this Light also consists of six Sefirot: Hesed- 
Gevura-Tifferet-Netzah-HodYesod. 

The name of the letter Tav, “truth,” indicates that in order to reach its 
level, its degree, one must attain the property of truth. Therefore, the letter Tav 
claimed that with its properties man can fully analyze good and evil, renounce 
his impure desires as false, and to the degree that he renounces them, draw 
closer to the pure desires (forces), and thereby be certain that he will reach the 
goal of creation—correction of all his desires (Gmar Tikkun, end of correction). 

This corresponds to the saying: “The Creator is close only to those who 
truly ask Him for help.” For only with His help can one achieve correction 
and spiritual elevation. However, this help only comes to those who genuinely, 
“truly” demand it. As soon as man is able to cry out wholeheartedly for the 
Creator’s help, he instantly receives it. And if he does not receive an answer 
from the Creator—it is a sign that his request is not yet complete, that he did not 
yet fully realize his egoistic nature and properties as worthless, has not yet fully 
felt his helplessness and inability to exit and correct his properties by himself. 
This is why letter Tav was certain that once man acquires its property of truth, 
he will be able to reach the goal. 




148 


The Zohar 


But the Creator answered her that it is not worthy of becoming the basis 
of creation, for the forces of judgment that would arise from it would be so 
strong that even the complete righteous, who fulfilled the entire Torah from 
Aleph to Tav (A to Z) and reached the property of truth, will nevertheless be 
punished by it, for they have not destroyed all the sinners, as it is written in 
the Talmud (Shabbat, 55). 

Furthermore, the Creator declines its request, for it is also the seal of 
death, as its power brought death to this world. For man is bound to die, as the 
serpent forged its seal and deceived Adam in his understanding of the Tree of 
Knowledge. This is why the world cannot exist with its properties. 

THE LETTER SHIN 

24. The letter Shin appeared before the Creator and said: “Maker of the 
world, it befits the world to be created with me, for Your own name Shadday 
begins with me.” The Creator replied: “You are fine, handsome, and truthful, 
but since the letters (properties) of the word Sheker (falsehood) took you to 
be with them, I cannot create the world with your properties, for SheKeR 
(falsehood) exists only because the letters Kuf and R eish took you.” 

Malchut consists of ten Sefirot and has two endings: 

1) If she has only her own properties, she contains all ten Sefirot, from 
Keter de Malchut to Malchut de Malchut. In this case she firmly restricts 
the diffusion of Light and is designated by the letter Tav, 

2) If Ima-Bina of the world of Atzilut fills Malchut with her Light, Partzuf 
Malchut ends not in the Sefira Malchut, but in the Sefira Yesod, and is 
designated by the letter Shin. 

The three tips of the letter Shin are called its crown and signify the Light of 
Bina, Ohr Hassadim (the Light of Mercy), which descends from Partzuf Ima-Bina 
into Partzuf Malchut. This Light of Bina, Ohr Hassadim (the Light of Mercy), 
creates new altruistic properties in Malchut, altruistic intentions to receive the 
Light for the Creator’s sake, after which Partzuf Malchut can receive the Ohr 
Hochma (Light of Wisdom) from ZA (Talmud, Sanhedrin, 22). When bonded 
so, ZA and Malchut are called “husband and wife,” and the Light that Malchut 
receives from ZA is called ‘TOO blessings.” 

This new ending of Partzuf Malchut in the Sefira Yesod instead of in the Sefira 
Malchut is therefore called Yesod de Nukva or “the central point of existence,” 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


149 


for all that exists in the world originates from it and exists thanks to it. Partzuf 
Malchut is the sum of all the creatures, and we are all its parts. All the worlds 
and all that inhabit them constitute various parts of Partzuf Malchut of the 
world of Atzilut. 

Each Upper Partzuf is considered the Creator of its adjacent lower Partzuf, 
for the latter originates (born) from it. Therefore, in relation to all the crea¬ 
tures, Zeir Anpin of the world of Atzilut is considered and called “the Creator,” 
our Creator. 

And, like the Tav, the letter S/xin is called “truth” and “the Creator’s seal,” 
for a seal signifies the end of a spiritual object— Partzuf, like a seal fixed at the 
end of a letter, written in the name of the Creator. The Creator’s seal is similar 
to Himself; this is why the seal is called the mark of truth, for only the pres¬ 
ence of a seal gives a letter the force of truth, and confirms the truthfulness 
of its content. 

However, the significance of the letter Shin is greater than that of the letter 
Tav, for Shin is the first letter of the word Shadday, one of the Creator’s names- 
properties, designating His power, by which He said “Dai” (enough) to creation- 
stop and do not descend further (Talmud, Hagigah, 12)—do not descend below 
the letter Shin. 

This reveals that the world and its inhabitants can only exist with the help 
of the letter Shin, thanks to its property that restricts the diffusion of Light. 
The Creator said: “Stop, Creature, at the letter Shin, and do not spread to the 
letter Tav,” for if the Light had spread to Tav, the impure forces would have 
received such great strength that man would have no hope of escaping them and 
reaching altruistic properties. This is why the ending point of Shin is called “the 
central point of existence.” 

Therefore, after the letter Shin saw the Creator refuse the letter Tav, precisely 
because ending the diffusion of Light with Tav creates conditions for correction 
of the world that are too difficult for man to meet, the letter Shin claimed that 
its property of Shadday is suitable for the creation of the world, and was certain 
that the Creator would choose it—its properties—as the basis of creation, for 
it possesses all the advantages that Tav lacked, which was the reason for the 
Creator’s refusal. 

And it has Tav’s advantage, as well: it is the Creator’s seal—truth. Moreover, 
it has an additional advantage: it is called by the name Shadday, the new ending 
of Malchut for the inhabitants of the world, instead of the ending by the property 



150 


The Zohar 


of the letter Tav. Based on all that, the letter Shin found the strength and courage 
to appear before the Creator with the proposition to create the world with it. 

But the Creator answered that precisely because of Shin’s additional 
advantages compared to those of the letter Tav, the impure forces opposite it 
are strengthened. For opposite each letter (spiritually pure forces or properties) 
there is an opposing impure force (egoistic desire), as it is written: “The Creator 
had made one opposite the other” (Kohelet, 7:14). 

The strengthening of the impure forces from the properties of the letter Shin 
occurred as a result of her properties joining the impure properties of falsehood, 
forging spiritual purity of the letters Kuf and Reish: falsehood would be unable 
to exist in the world, for it would be recognized at once, had the letters Kuf and 
Reish not put Shin at the head of the word SheKeR (falsehood). And when truth 
stands at the head of the word that designates the property of falsehood, man 
naturally tends to err. 

There are two sources of impure forces: the first is a small luminescence 
(Ner Dakik), which the pure force itself (the Creator) sends to the impure forces 
(desires) so as to sustain them. This is done so they would not disappear until 
there is a need to “punish” the sinners with them. However, these are small 
forces—their height is not great, for they receive only a small luminescence, 
sufficient to sustain their life. 

This small luminescence descends into the impure forces from the letter 
Kuf, which results in these impure forces becoming similar to man in the 
worlds BYA, as a monkey in comparison to a human being, as it is said: “The 
Creator had made one opposite the other” ( Kohelet, 7:14). 

The second source of impure forces arises from the lower ones’ spiritual fall: 
as a result of people’s evil, egoistic actions, the Light passes from the system of 
the pure forces into the impure. And the first transgression is Adam’s sin, by 
which the system of the impure forces assumed an identical formation to that of 
the pure system, stationing itself opposite, parallel to it. As a result, the impure 
worlds ABYA emerged opposite the pure ones. 

The second source of impure forces is the letter Reish, which indicates that 
the impure forces rise and attach themselves to the pure forces, right up to the 
level of Bina of Malchut, designated by the letter Dalet. 

As was previously stated, the twenty-two letters of Partzuf Malchut of the 
world of Atzilut are divided in three groups of letters: units in Bina, tens in ZA, 
and hundreds in Malchut. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


151 


PARTZUF 

SEFIROT 

LETTERS 


Bina 

Aleph-Tet 

BIN A (IMA) 

ZA 

Yod-Tzadik 


Malchut 

Kuf-Tav 


Bina 

Aleph-Tet 

ZA 

ZA 

Yod-Tzadik 


Malchut 

Kuf-Tav 


Bina 

Aleph-Tet 

MALCHUT 

ZA 

Yod-Tzadik 


Malchut 

Kuf-Tav 


The letters Aleph-Bet-Gimel correspond to Sefirot Keter-Hochma-Bina, called 
“the head” of a spiritual object (Partzuf). The letters from Dalet to Tet refer to the 
body of the Partzuf. 


Aleph - Keter 

Bet - Hochma 

Gimel - Bina 

HEAD 

Dalet - Hesed 

Hey - Gevura 

Vav - Tifferet 

Zayin - Netzah 

Chet - Hod 

Tet - Yesod 

BODY 


The body only receives what descends to it from the head. Therefore, Dalet, 
the first letter of the body, through which the body receives Light from the head, 
is called Dalah ve Aniyah (poor and destitute). Dalet only receives what Gimel gives 
it. Since Gimel contains the Light of Hassadim, that is, what descends into Dalet. 

And this is why the letter Gimel is called Gomel Hassadim (merciful One) 
(Talmud, Shabbat, 104), according to its action with regard to Dale t, which would 
otherwise be completely without Light. The protruding sharp angle on the right 
side of Dalet is the sign of Dalet’s abundance of Ohr Hassadim. 











152 


The Zohar 


However, opposite the pure (altruistic) Malchut, stands the impure Malchut, 
who is pride and does not wish to receive the Light from Gimel and rely on it. 
Instead, she rises up in the desire to be the head, and in so creates the sharp 
angle of the Dalet. That indicates that the presence of Ohr Hassadim disappears, 
transforming it into the letter Reish, which is written as it is pronounced—with 
two letters: Reish and Shin. 

The true merging of the pure ZA and Malchut is called E CHaD (one), 
consists of the letters Aleph, Chet and Dalet, for the letters from Aleph to Chet 
are the nine Sefirot of ZA. He passes the Light from Gimel of Bina to Gimel of 
Malchut, resulting in Malchut being filled with the Light of Hassadim, thereby 
becoming Dalet with a protruding right angle. As a result of this, ZA and 
Malchut become one. 

When the lower ones (people) sin in their actions (intentions), they give 
the impure Malchut the strength to cling to the pure one—Dalet, to erase the 
sharp angle of the Light of Hassadim and turn it into the letter Reish. Thus, 
the word Echad (one) becomes Acher (other, alien, foreign): Aleph-Chet-Dalet of 
the word Echad are transformed into Aleph-Chet-Reish of the word Acher, for 
instead of the connection with the Creator emerges a connection with other, 
impure forces, called “ Elokim Acherim” (other gods), which cling to ZA and 
Malchut of the pure world of Atzilut. 

This leads to the letters Kuf and Reish distorting the Creator’s seal (Shin), 
the letter of truth. As a result, Yesod of Malchut, which receives from Yesod de ZA, 
becomes linked to the impure source instead of the pure, for a new Yesod of the 
impure Malchut was formed with the help of the letter Shin. 

From here the impure forces develop up to ten Sefirot with a head and a 
body, whereas Shin becomes the source of all that desolates, for destruction of 
purity begets impurity. And from this emerged the system of the impure worlds 
ABYA of the impure man. 

Thus, we have learned how the letters Kuf and Reish became the two 
sources of emergence and development of impure forces. And since the impure 
forces pose as pure, they are called false, counterfeit letters whose purpose is to 
annihilate the system of the pure forces and their unity with the Creator, so as 
to forge themselves out of the devastation of the pure forces. 

The birth of the impure forces from the destruction of the pure ones 
is possible on account of the letter Shin, Yesod of Malchut, joining with the 
impure forces as a result of the forging of the letter Reish out of Dalet. Thereby, 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


153 


Echad turns into Acker, and the system of the impure forces ( Elokim Acherim, 
other gods) is created. 

And had the letters Kuf and Reish not captured the letter Shin, such an 
enormous system of impure forces, so capable of lying and falsifying everything 
in the eyes of man, would not have come into being. 

Therefore, the Creator answered the letter Shin: “Though you are good, you 
will stand at the head of the word Sheker (falsehood) together with the letters 
Kuf and Reish. Indeed, upon capturing you, with your power they will be able 
to create an entire system of impure forces of falsehood and forgery. Hence, I 
cannot create the world with your properties, for since there is an impure system 
opposite from you, it is impossible to achieve the goal of creation with you.” 

THE LETTERS KUF AND REISH 

25. From the aforesaid, it follows that whoever wishes to tell a lie will succeed 
if he first tells the truth as a base on which the lie will then grow and start 
to act. And this is because the letter Shin is a letter of truth, in which the 
Patriarchs had been united, for the three lines in the writing of the letter 
Shin (a) signify the three Patriarchs, who designate the Se/frot-p roper ties 
Hesed-Qevura-Tifferet. 

The letters Kuf and Reish indicate the evil side, as they form the impure 
side, called KaR (cold), which lacks warmth and life, for it draws its sustenance 
from Malchut when she turns from living water into ice. However, to create an 
opportunity to exist, these letters attach the Shin to themselves, thus creating the 
combination KeSHeR (tie, knot), which embodies strength and survival. 

For the Light of Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet of Bina, which she receives from Yesod 
de ZA, creates a new ending in Malchut, a new Kli-desire to receive the Light 
called ‘TOO blessings” from ZA. And since Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet are called the 
Patriarchs, and the Light that passes to Malchut descends from them, the letter 
Shin that designates them is called “truth.” 

By eliminating the sharp angle of the letter Dalet, the impure forces turn it 
into the letter Reish. By this, they convert the word ECHaD into ACHeR, thereby 
stealing Yesod of the pure Malchut, designated by Shin. Also, with the letter Shin 
they build the Yesod of the impure Malchut, which leads to a very strong clinging 
of impure forces to pure ones. This clinging is called KeSHeR, the reciprocal tie 
joining pure and impure forces, a knot that is not easily severed. 



154 


The Zohar 


From the aforesaid, we see that the reason for the letters wishing for the world 
to be created with them is that each of them believes that only its properties can 
correct the world. The letter Shin thinks that the Light of Hassadim will bring the 
souls to the goal of creation. However, the letters Kuf and Reish—KaR (cold)—do 
not desire this Light, for receiving the Light of Mercy for the sake of bestowal is 
pure, but receiving it for the sake of pleasure is impure. 

THE LETTER TZADIK 

26. Subsequently, the letter Tzadik appeared before the Creator and said: 
“Master of the world, You should create the world with me, for Tzadikim (the 
righteous) are marked by me. You, who is called a Tzadik (righteous one), are 
also recorded within me, for You are righteous and You love righteousness. 
Therefore, my properties are suitable to create the world by.” 

The Creator answered: “Tzadik, you are truly righteous, but you must 
remain concealed and not be revealed to the extent required were the world 
to be created by you, so as to not give the world an excuse.” The concealment 
of the letter Tzadik is necessary, for first came the letter Nun, which was 
then joined by the letter Yod from the Creator’s Holy Name Yod-Hey-Vav-Hey 
(HaVaYaH), who stood above it as a mark of the bond between the Creator 
and His creations, mounted the letter Nun and joined it on its right hand side, 
thereby creating the letter Tzadik. 

The reason for the necessity of concealing the letter Tzadik, which makes it 
unsuitable for the creation of the world with it, is that when the Creator created 
Adam, i.e., ZA, He created him as two Partzufi m-objects—ma 1 e and female, 
connected to each other back to back. This is why the letter Yod stands with its 
back to the back of the letter Nun, both facing opposite directions, just as the 
letter Tzadik is depicted: the face of Yod turned upwards, while the face of Nun 
is turned downwards. 

And the Creator also said to Tzadik: “In the future I will revoke the 
relationship of back-to back, and will join them face-to-face. In another place shall 
you so rise as such, but not at the beginning of creation. For in the beginning of 
creation, you must be connected back-to-back by the letters Nun and Yod, for this 
form indicates that the Light in you is concealed. Therefore, the world cannot 
be created with you.” The letter Tzadik then left. 

Tzadik came to suggest that the world should be created with its properties, 
for when it saw that the Tav’s request was turned down by the Creator due to 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


155 


its heavy laws, and the letter Shin— due to die impure forces clinging to it—it 
thought that its properties could be suitable for the creation of the world. After 
all, it, too, contains the Creator’s seal, and no impure forces cling to it. 

That is why T zadik said to the Creator that the righteous are sealed by 
its name as a mark of their union with Him, by circumcision and turning 
up of the place of contact (Z ivug) with the Creator, which, thanks to these 
corrections, repels all the impure forces. 

The Creator, called Bina, is also marked by T zadik, for He is righteous 
like ZA, since the Upper Part of Bina of the world of Atzilut (Aba ve Ima—AVl) 
corresponds to the male and female parts, like ZA and Malchut. And AVI are 
forever joined so as to send down the Light of Mercy and thus sustain the 
existence of all that are below them. This is why T zadik thought itself suitable 
for creating the world, for the world lives by the Light of Mercy, and can reach 
the goal with its help. 

The letter T zadik is called the Sefira Yesod of ZA. When Yesod joins with 
Malchut, it is defined as T zadik (righteous), for the nine Sefirot of ZA are from Yod 
to T zadik, and Kuf is the beginning of Malchut, which consists of four Sefirot— 
Kuf, Reish, Shin, and Tav. 

When Malchut is joined with Yesod of ZA, Kuf is joined with T zadik, and 
Yesod is called T zadik (righteous). And to this the Creator replied to Tzadik that 
it is Tzadik in Yesod of ZA: “And you are Tzadik in Me, for AVI are forever joined 
so as to pour down the Light of Mercy and sustain the existence of the lower 
ones. And you are righteous, for Malchut is also connected to you, just as in the 
alphabet, Kuf follows Tzadik. Yet, in spite of all that, you do not merit for your 
properties to become the basis of the world.” 

Yesod of ZA includes in itself Malchut in the form of the letter Kuf in the 
word TzadiK. And when Malchut is included in Yesod as Tzadik, it is designated 
by the letter Nun, for Nun is Gevura of ZA ( Yod-Keter, Chaf-Hochma, Lamed-Bina, 
M em-Hesed, Nun-Gevura). 

When ZA grows and becomes big, his Sefirot Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet become 
Sefirot Hochma-Bina-Daat. Thus, Gevura becomes Bina. And when ZA becomes 
small once again, Bina, too, returns to being Gevura (Nun). This fall is designated 
by Nun’s head looking down. 

The letter Tzadik consists of the letters Nun and Yod connected back-to-back. 
The letter Nun designates Malchut with the properties of the Sefira Yesod included in 
her; Yod designates the actual Yesod of ZA. Their connection—back-to-back, facing 
out in opposite directions—indicates that impure forces cling to their backs. 



156 


The Zohar 


They conceal their backs from strangers since there is a flaw in their backs—the 
desire to receive the Light of Wisdom (Ohr Hochma). This flaw must be concealed 
so as to prevent the impure forces from clinging to their backs. Therefore, the 
letter Tzadik is unsuitable for the world to be created by its properties. Its very 
shape reveals an opportunity for the impure forces to cling to it; this is why Adam 
(created out of ZA and Malchut when they are joined as Tzadik ) is also created 
consisting of two halves, male and female, joined at their backs. 

And if the letter Tzadik were to argue that in the big state, in the presence 
of Ohr Hochma, ZA and Malchut unite face-to-face, it would be told that such 
connection is impossible at their place, but only during their ascent to AVI. For 
if such a connection were possible in their own place, the impure forces would 
immediately cling to them. For this reason, the letter Tzadik is unworthy of 
becoming the basis of the universe. 

THE LETTER PE H 

27. The letter P eh entered and said: “Master of the world, it would be good 
to create the world with me, for the future liberation of the world is inscribed 
in me, as the word P edut (liberation, redemption) begins with me. That is, 
liberation is deliverance from all suffering. And it is therefore fitting to create 
the world with me.” 

The Creator answered her: “Though you are fine, the word P eshah 
(transgression) begins with you and is secretly denoted by you, like a serpent 
that strikes and hides its head in its body. So a sinner bows his head, hiding 
from others’ eyes, but stretches out his hands to sin. So is the shape of the 
letter P eh, whose head is hidden inside it.” And the Creator also said to the 
letter A yin that it would be unfitting to create the world with its properties, 
for within it is the property of Avon (crime, sin). And though Ayin tried to 
object, saying that its properties are contained in the word A navah (humility), 
the Creator refused it nonetheless. 

Pedut (Liberation) begins with the letter Peh, meaning that the property 
of Peh is contained in future liberation. This is why the letter Peh claims that 
it is worthy of being the basis of the world. Indeed, both Galut (exile) and 
Ge’ula (redemption) depend on Malchut: when Malchut has no inner Light 
of Hochma, the people of Israel are exiled from the land of Israel. For in our 
world, the land of Israel corresponds to Malchut of the world of Atzilut, the 
spiritual land of Israel. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


157 


Just as in the spiritual world, ZA (Israel) distances from Malchut (the land 
of Israel), the people of Israel separate and leave their land in our world. And 
when the children of Israel correct their actions, they cause ZA (Israel) to fill his 
Malchut (the land of Israel) with Light, build her with his Light and unite with 
her face-to-face. As a result, the children of Israel of our world merit redemption 
and return to their land. 

The Light from ZA, which builds and fills Malchut, descends from Sefirot 
Netzah and Hod in ZA. Hochma of Malchut clothes in Netzah and Bina of Malchut 
clothes in Hod. The letters Ayin and Peh are Netzah and Hod in ZA. This is why 
Peh, the Sefira Hod in ZA, claimed that it was suitable to be the basis of the world, 
for the Light of Hochma that brings redemption to the entire world stems from 
Peh to Malchut. Thus, if the world achieved its property, it would undoubtedly 
reach the end of correction—complete redemption. 

The letter Peh thought that it was more suitable to become the basis of 
the world than Ayin because although O hr Hochma enters Netzah-Ayin and Hod- 
Peh, and is mainly present in Netzah-Ayin, redemption depends on Hod-Peh, 
nonetheless. That is because initially, Bina liberates Malchut from her restrictions 
and thereby redeems her. 

By receiving from Bina her properties of mercy, Malchut merits redemption. 
This is fulfilled in the following way: Bina transcends her own properties and 
joins with Malchut, as a result of which, upon receiving the Light of Hassadim, 
Malchut can now receive the Light of Hochma. The restrictions imposed on the 
reception of Light mostly affect the left side, i.e., Hod-Peh in ZA. And that is why 
the letter Peh thought that since the Light of Bina enters it, and not Netzah-Ayin, 
it is better suited to become the basis of the world. 

However, all the individual corrections made during the 6,000 years of the 
world’s existence until the end of correction are considered incomplete, for the 
Upper Light, which allows for the discovery and analysis of all the impure forces 
within oneself, is not present in its entirety. Therefore, the Light may not be 
received in the worlds of BYA, below Parsa, below the boundary that separates 
the world of Atzilut from the worlds of BYA. 

Parsa is Malchut that ascended to Bina in order to restrict the diffusion and 
reception of Light into those parts of her that are located below Bina. And as 
a consequence of Adam’s attempt to nevertheless receive the Light under the 
Parsa, impurity slipped into Malchut, of which it is said that the serpent appeared 
before Chava (Eve) and brought impurity upon her (Talmud, Shabbat, 146). This 
impurity will only be corrected at the end of correction. 



158 


The Zohar 


The thing is that the absence of the Upper Light in the force capable of 
discerning good from evil in all of Malchut’s thickness gives rise to a flaw called 
“tears”—two tears that fall into a vast sea from the two eyes of Hochma and Bina 
drat are concealed from all. 

The two eyes are Hochma and Bina, and die tears signify die flaw in them 
from the presence of die impure force that appeared in diem as a result of 
Adam’s sin. This led to die ruin of the two Temples. These tears in Malchut’s 
eyes will only dry at the end of correction, when death disappears from the 
world and all die Light shines in Hochma and Bina (item 56). 

So the letter Peh was told that although it brings the world Pedut (redemption) 
with its Light, and although all redemptions pass only through it, this Light is 
incomplete. All the individual corrections are imperfect, for they come and go, 
just as the two Temples. 

For the properties of Peshah (transgression) and Pedut (redemption) in the 
letter Peh are not sufficiently perfect and complete so as to withstand the sin of 
Adam, for in the absence of the full Light of Hochma, there is clinging of impure 
forces. Hence, the letter Peh is unworthy of being the basis of the world. 

And since the property of Peshah (transgression) is concealed, the force of 
the serpent is present therein, deceiving people and leading them to their death. 
And it is impossible to kill it, just as a snake bites and immediately hides its head 
in itself (similar to the head of the letter Peh), which makes it impossible to kill 
it, for one may only kill the serpent within oneself by striking the “head.” This 
is why the letter Peh is unsuitable for the creation of the world. 

THE LETTER AYIN 

Bina of the world of Atzilut is called Ima Ilaa (Supernal Mother) and also Anavah 
(modesty, humility). (Here, the capital “A” designates the letter Ay in, not to be 
confused with Aleph). The Sefira Netzah of Zeir Anpin (designated by the letter 
Ay in) clothes into Malchut with all of its Light, and ascends to Bina, who adorns 
her with her own adornments: Bina clothes into Netzah of ZA. But since the 
letter Peh, signifying Peshah (transgression) is concealed in Netzah, the Creator 
refused to create the world with its properties, as it is written in item 27. 

Two words render the meaning of the word “transgression” in Hebrew: 
Peshah and Avon. However, “transgression” is mainly concentrated in the letter 
Peh, for Malchut of ZA connects into the Sefira Hod of ZA. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


159 


As a result of Adam’s sin, Klipot (shells, impure forces) cling to Malchut of 
ZA. But Netzah of ZA is a property of ZA himself, and impure forces cannot 
cling to it. Yet, as it is written in the Talmud ( Baba Kama), even Netzah is subject 
to Klipot clinging to it. 

This flaw—the ability of the impure forces to cling to Netzah of ZA—is called 
“transgression.” However, the word Avon (not Peshah) indicates that Netzah is 
pure and direct, and that the transgression is caused by its connection with 
the Sefira Hod. 

The reason the Creator turns to the letters Peh and Ayin at the same time 
is that Netzah and Hod are like two body parts—two legs. This is why they both 
appeared before Him with their requests. However, The Zohar clarifies each of 
them (their properties) one at a time. 

THE LETTER SAMECH 

28. The letter Samech appeared before the Creator and said: “Creator of the 
world, it would be good to create the world with my properties, for within 
me is Smicha (support) for the fallen, as it is written: ‘The Creator supports 
(Sornech) all who fall.’” The Creator replied: “That is why you are needed in 
your place; do not move from it. If you move from your place, contained in 
the word Sornech, those who fall will lose your support, for they rely on you 
(your properties).” Having heard this, the letter Samech departed. 

The letter Samech stands for Sefira Tifferet in ZA, i.e., Bina in the body of 
ZA. Since Sefirot Keter-Hochma-Bina (KHB) were transformed into Hesed-Gevura- 
Tifferet ( HGT) in ZA, they were emptied of the Light of Hochma, and were left 
with only die Light of Hassadim, thus changing their name from KHB to HGT. 

As we know, Bina consists of two parts: the Upper Part, called GAR: Gimel 
(three) Rishonot (first ones)—the first three Sefirot KHB, and the lower part, called 
ZAT: Z ayin (seven) Tachtonot (lower ones)—the seven lower Sefirot from Hesed to 
Malchut. The Upper Part of Bina is called Aba ve Ima (AVI). Being filled with the 
Light of Mercy, Aba ve Ima exist in a state of perfection—without any desire to 
receive, but only to bestow. 

AVI are designated by Samech (numerical value - 60), for they include the 
first three Sefirot KHB and three Sefirot of ZA, which, in view of the absence of 
Ohr Hochma in ZA, are not called KHB, but rather HGT. Therefore AVI consist 
of six Sefirot, each consisting of ten, totaling 60 = Samech. 



160 


The Zohar 


ZAT of Bina receive the Light from Above and pass it on to ZA. This part 
of Bina has the property of ZA, rather than of Bina, as it needs to receive exactly 
what ZA needs, and then pass it to him. Since, unlike Bina, who does not wish 
to receive anything, ZAT of Bina need to receive Ohr Hochma for ZA, they feels 
a lack for it, and thus separate from Bina and an independently existing object- 
Partzuf forms out of her lower part. 

This Partzuf is called YESHSUT, and it is designated by the letter Mem 
(numerical value - 40), for it consists of four Sefirot-Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod 
of Partzuf AVI. Owing to its shape (properties), the block-letter Mem is called 
Mem St umah (closed). 

However, this separation of AVI into two parts occurs only when they have 
no Light of Hochma, but only the Light of Hassadim. Consequently, the Upper 
Part of Bina remains in its perfection, whereas the lower part feels a flaw in its 
state by not receiving Ohr Hochma. And since spiritual objects are separated by 
the differences in their properties, the sensation of imperfection separates the 
lower part of Bina from the Upper. 

However, if those below improve their “intentions” (called “actions” in 
the spiritual), and ask ZA for help in correcting their actions, overcoming the 
egoism of impure desires, and acquiring spiritually pure, altruistic desires, ZA 
then turns to the superior YESHSUT, which turns to AVI. AVI then send their 
request even higher, receive the Light of Hochma and pass it to YESHSUT. 

Finally, YESHSUT and AVI unite into one Partzuf, for having received Ohr 
Hochma, YESHSUT becomes as perfect as AVI are perfect being filled with Ohr 
Hassadim. YESHSUT passes the Light of Hochma down to ZA, who then passes 
it to Malchut. The Light that Malchut receives from ZA is referred to as 100 
blessings, for Samech = 60 joins with Mem = 40. 

However, when man sins in his intentions (desires, actions), he does not 
turn to Malchut with a request for help, causing the Light of Hochma to disappear 
from ZA, and ZA returns from Gadlut (big state) back to Katnut (small state). 
(When ZA contains the Light of Hochma, he is called “big”; and when he is filled 
with only the Light of Hassadim, he is called “small”). And the united Partzuf 
Bina is once more divided into AVI and YESHSUT. 

In this small state (Katnut), ZA and Malchut are in danger of impure forces 
(Klipot) clinging to them. To make certain this does not happen, for then they 
may fall from the world of Atzilut below the Parsa into the worlds BYA, AVI send 
them the property of Samech (the Light of Mercy). And although it is only the 
Light of Hassadim without the Light of Wisdom (Light of Hochma), it provides 
ZA and Malchut with the sensation of perfection in acts of bestowal, and thus 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


161 


impure forces can no longer cling to them, for the sole intention of the impure 
forces is to receive the Light of Wisdom from a pure Partzuf. 

And this is why the Light that fills ZA in Katnut is called Samech, which 
testifies to its action: Samech “supports” ZA and Malchut so that they wouldn’t 
fall from the world of Atzilut below the Parsa. 

That is why the letter Samech thought that if the world were created with 
its properties, it would be able to reach the goal of creation and merge with 
the Creator. Its Light could shine in ZA and Malchut even in their small state, 
and the Klipa (impure force) would not attempt to snatch the Light from them. 
On the contrary, the impure, egoistic forces would flee from its Light. Samech 
believed that if the world were to be created with its properties, it would be able 
to protect all creatures, even when their actions were corrupted, for even in such 
a state, the impure force would not be able to harm them. 

But the Creator said to Samech that precisely because its role is to support 
those who fall and to protect the lower ones in times of their spiritual descent, 
it must stay in its place and not move from it. For if the world were created by 
it, its power would always prevail over all, ridding ZA and Malchut of the chance 
to grow out of their small state. 

And if ZA and Malchut don’t stimulate the lower ones (people) to raise 
MAN—request for help in achieving Gadlut, the Upper Light will not be able 
to descend to bring the creatures to the end of correction and redemption. 
Therefore, the letter Samech must support the lower ones until they merit more. 
But when they do merit, they will be able to receive the great Light called ‘TOO 
blessings” into their entire Partzuf. So the Creator refused to create the world 
with the letter Samech. 

“Because the lower ones need Samech only in their Katnut, in the absence 
of the Light of Wisdom (O hr Hochma), ZON need you and you can help them. 
However, they need you only in their Katnut. But you do not help to bring them 
to perfection, and so you cannot be the basis of the world.” 

THE LETTER NUN 

29. The letter Nun entered and said to the Creator: “It would be good for You 
to create the world with me, for Norah Tehilot (great praises) is written with 
me, as well as ‘Praising of the righteous.’” 

The Creator replied: “Return to your place, for you are the reason that 
the letter Samech returned to its place. And rely on it for support. For the 



162 


The Zohar 


letter Nun exists in the word N efilah (fall), which must be corrected by the 
letter Samech. This is the reason why it needed to return to its place—so as to 
strengthen the lower ones.” The letter Nun left Him at once. 

When Nun saw that the Creator sent the letter Samech away (as its properties 
are only used in the state of Katnut, that is, only to support those who had fallen 
from the Gadlut), it thought that it was worthy of being the basis of the world. 
This is because not only does Nun have all the advantages of Samech, but it can 
also use Ohr Hochma, the Light of Gadlut. Thus, the reason for the Creator’s 
refusal to Samech does not apply to Nun. 

The Sefira Gevura in ZA is called Nun, for it is entirely mitigated by Bina’s 
property of mercy, called Nun = 50 gates of Bina. It is this property of Gevura that 
gives ZA the name Norah Tehilot (great praises). Ima-Bina is called Tehilah (praise), 
and since Gevura descends from Bina, it is referred to as Norah Tehilot, while Nun 
is used in the Sefira Yesod, in the Gadlut of ZA during his Z ivug with Nukva. Like 
Ima, this is whence Nukva receives the name Tehilah, while ZA becomes one in 
both Tehilot—Ima and Nukva. 

Therefore, the letter Nun said that, being in Gevura, the left line of ZA, it 
attracts the Light of Mercy emanated by Samech (Bina, Ima), which is also called 
the “Upper Tehilah,” as a result of which ZA acquires its properties and the name 
Norah Tehilot to match them. This is why Nun has all the properties of Samech: the 
Light of Mercy that bestows perfection and repels the impure forces-desires. 

The letter Nun added: “However, I have an additional advantage in that I am 
used during the big state of ZA in his Yesod, in the letter Tzadik, of which I am 
the left element.” This Nun in the letter Tzadik is that same Nun that is defined as 
Norah Tehilot (praises of the righteous), for even when ZA achieves Gadlut during 
the ascent of ZON to AVI, Nun also acts in Yesod of ZA, connecting Nukva back- 
to-back with ZA, so that ZA receives the Light of Mercy from AVI (Samech). 

And so Nun is called “praises of the righteous,” for Yod (righteous one, the 
basis of the world) mounts it. Nun is called “great praises,” for it attracts the 
Light of Wisdom to Malchut in the state of Gadlut. 

Therefore, we find that Malchut receives all her beauty from Nun, which is 
located in Yesod of ZA. This is why the letter Nun claimed that it merits for the 
world to be created with its properties, for its luminescence adds to the Light of 
Wisdom that unites and revives ZON, and does not merely support them, like 
the letter Samech. 

So the Creator answered it: “You are wrong in thinking that you merit 
leading the world to complete correction by your properties, without the clinging 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


163 


of impure forces, for even your properties need to be supported by the letter 
Samech. Indeed, this is precisely why you are connected back-to-back with the 
letter Yod, and the Light of Samech guards you against the clinging of the impure 
forces onto you. And that is why your properties, which rely upon the strength 
of Samech, are merely ones of support. Hence, you are unworthy of becoming 
the basis of the world.” 


THE LETTERS MEM AND LAMED 

30. The letter Mem entered and said: “Master of the world, it would be good 
for You to create the world by me, for M elech (King) is called by me.” The 
Creator replied: “That is so, but I shall not create the world by you, for the 
world needs a King. Return to your place. Also, I shall not create the world 
with the letters Lamed and Chaf that form the word MeLeCH (King), as the 
world cannot exist without a King.” 

The letter Mem is the Sefira Hesed in ZA, which receives the Light from its 
corresponding Sefira Hesed in Bina. When, in addition to the Light of Mercy 
in his small state, ZA receives the Light of Wisdom and becomes big, his Sefirot 
HGT turn into Sefirot Hochma-Bina-Daat (HBD ). In other words, Hesed in ZA 
ascends and becomes Hochma, thereby revealing a new Light, the Light of 
Hochma, the Light of the Creator’s face. 

This is why the letter Mem claimed that it was suitable for the world to be 
created by it, for it reveals the Creator’s Light to the world, thereby eliminat¬ 
ing any risk of impure forces clinging to it, and so the world is guaranteed 
complete correction. 

But the Creator answered that it is forbidden to reveal this Light to the 
world, for the world needs for this great Light to first clothe itself in the three 
letters of the word MeLeCH. In other words, the great Light may be revealed in 
the world only if Mem joins with the letters Lamed and Chaf. So the Creator said, 
“Go and join with them.” 

Mem in the word M elech is Hesed. Lamed is Bina, which passes the Light 
to ZA. The letter Chaf is Malchut, Nukva of ZA, for there cannot be a M elech 
(King) without Malchut (Kingdom). Also, all of the Light becomes revealed only 
thanks to Malchut. 

In this case, Malchut shines from ZA in three places: 

1) Malchut becomes a Kisseh (throne) for a King (ZA). A Kisseh derives from 
Kissui (cover, concealment), so it is designated by the bent letter Chaf. 



164 


The Zohar 


2) Malchut clothes ZA. Because the great Light is revealed only to Israel, 
Malchut clothes ZA, and when her kingdom is revealed, ZA frees 
himself from her garment and throws it over all the nations of the 
world, idolaters, and the Light of his face pours upon Israel. And all 
the righteous then point their finger at the Creator and say: “This is 
the Creator, to whom I aspired!” This diffusion of Light is designated 
by the letter Chaf. 

3) Malchut becomes a crown on the head of ZA. And this is the property 
of the letter Chaf, of Keter (crown of ZA). 


THE LETTER CHAF 

31. At this time the letter Chaf descended from the Kisseh - the Creator’s 
throne, and stood before the Creator. It trembled and said to Him: “Creator 
of the world, with my properties I merit to become the basis of the world, for I 
am Kavod - Your Glory.” When the letter Chaf descended from the Creator’s 
throne, all the worlds trembled, and the throne itself, verging on collapse. 
The Creator then answered: “ Chaf , what are you doing here? I will not create 
the world by you. Return to your place, for you exist in the word Kelayah 
(destruction) and in the word Kalah (bride).” 

The Creator’s throne is the world of Beria. The appearance of the letter 
Mem before the Creator led to the letter Chaf falling from His throne. As a 
result, Hochma and Bina of the world of Beria trembled, as well as all the lower 
worlds with all their inhabitants. 

All the arguments that the letters raised in their wish for the world to be 
created with each of them is like raising MAN—a request for precise measure of 
help from Above in the form of Upper Light (called MAD), corresponding to 
that particular letter. 

If so, ZON will rule the world, and this ruling is effected by the very Light 
descending from ZON in the exact quantity of MAD that each letter evoked 
and caused, for the MAD precisely corresponds to the MAN in both quantity 
and quality, whereas MAN is the actual property of the letter. Hence, each letter 
argues that it can draw the kind of Light from Above that will surely bring all 
creatures to the goal. 

Similarly, the Creator’s answers to each of the twenty-two letters of ZON de 
Atzilut constitute the descending MAD (the Upper Light, strength, help) that 
precisely corresponds to the MAN raised by that particular letter. And when the 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


165 


Upper Light that descends from a particular letter begins to rule the world, this 
signifies the Creator’s reply to that letter. Since the impure forces cling to one of 
the letter’s properties, as the Creator created two precisely balanced, opposing 
systems of pure and impure forces, this reveals the letter’s inability to rule the 
world. And thus, the Creator dismissed each letter’s individual claim to build 
the world by its property in order to bring it to the goal of creation. 

Herein lies the Creator’s “game” with each of the twenty-two letters, giving 
each the opportunity to reveal its properties, power and forces, until it becomes 
clear from their aspirations and analysis, which of them truly merits the world 
being governed by it. 

From this we see that when the letter Mem began to reveal its great Light in 
the world, in doing so, it caused the fall of the Kisse (throne). This is so because 
the Kisse has two properties: (i) it covers and conceals the Creator, where the 
word Kisse derives from the word Kissui ; (ii) it reveals the Creator’s greatness in 
the worlds with the help of the three letters MeLeCH. Then, Malchut that became 
a Kissui, the Creator’s cover, ascends and turns to Chaf— the Creator’s own gar¬ 
ments—thus revealing the King (Creator), and it becomes a crown on His head. 

But as soon as the letter Mem, which was not clothed in Chaf, began to reveal 
the Light of the Creator’s face, the letter Chaf fell from the Kisse (the throne of 
His Glory), stopped concealing Him, and stated that from now on only the 
Creator’s revealed glory would rule over it, without any kind of concealment, as 
desired by Mem. 

Owing to Chaf’s fall from the throne, two hundred thousand worlds that origi¬ 
nate from Hochma and Bina of the world of Beria, as well as the worlds below them, 
shook and trembled on the verge of collapse. For the entire connection between 
the lower degree or Partzuf and the one above it lies in the fact that Malchut of the 
Upper Degree becomes Keter of the lower. And the property of the letter Chaf con¬ 
sists in clothing Malchut of an Upper spiritual object in Keter of a lower one. 

There are three distinctive features to the throne: (i) six steps leading to the 
throne, six Sefirot-Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod of the lower one; (ii) four 
legs of the throne, the Light in Sefirot Keter-Hochma-Bina-Daat of the lower one; 
(iii) Malchut of the Upper One that descends to the lower one, clothes into it, 
and all the Light from the Upper One is passed through her to the lower one. 

Thus, when CKa/fell from the throne of the Creator’s glory, the connection 
between the world of Atzilut and the throne (world of Beria) was severed. This 
is so because Chaf (Malchut of the world of Atzilut ) that clothes in Sefirot Keter- 
Hochma-Bina-Daat of the world of Beria pours all the Light onto the world of 



166 


The Zohar 


Beria, called the throne of His glory. But when Chaf fell from the throne, the 
connection between the world of Atzilut and the world of Beria was severed, 
Chaf trembled, for it lost the power to bestow upon the world of Beria, and two 
hundred thousand worlds ( Hochma and Bina out of Sefirot Keter-Hochma-Bina- 
Daat of the world of Beria) trembled in fear of collapsing, for they lost all of their 
life-force, which they receive from the world of Atzilut. 

Similarly, in the world of Atzilut, Bina of the world of Atzilut, the Creator, is 
connected with ZON. This is because Partzuf Bina of the world of Atzilut consists 
of ten Sefirot, and her last Sefira, Malchut, clothes in ZA of the world of Atzilut 
with the property of the letter Chaf. Malchut of the Sefira Bina, which clothes in 
ZA, is the letter Chaf. And this letter Chaf is the Creator’s throne in ZA. For the 
Creator is Bina, Sefira above ZA. And ZA becomes a throne for Bina. And during 
the fall, the connection between Bina and ZA is severed, since Chaf is Malchut of 
Bina; it clothes into ZA and passes all the Light to him. 

And it therefore trembled (lost its ability to bestow upon ZA), and so did 
two hundred thousand worlds, which are the Light for ZA, called Hochma and 
Bina or KHBD— the four legs of the throne—for all the Light departed from 
them. And the worlds trembled in fear of collapsing, that is, Sefirot Hesed-Gevura- 
Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod in ZA that include all the worlds below them, for all the 
Light of Bina departed thence. 

The Creator told the letter Chaf that because it fell from the throne of His 
glory, the first three Sefirot of ZA trembled, and all the other worlds are on the 
verge of total collapse and destruction without any hope of restoration; hence, 
Chaf must return to its place in the throne of glory. 

Chaf’s return to its place in the Creator’s throne takes place just as He 
refuses to create the world with the letter Mem, for the world needs a King. That 
is, the trembling of the letter Chaf as it fell from the Creator’s throne, which 
in turn, made the worlds tremble in fear of possible collapse, and the Creator’s 
answer to the letter Mem transpire simultaneously. 

THE LETTER YOD 

32. The letter Yod entered and said: “Maker of the world! It would be good 
to create the world by me, for Your Holy name begins with me.” The Creator 
replied: “It is sufficient that you are inscribed in My Name, in Me, and all of 
your aspirations are to Me, and you should not be uprooted from it all.” 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


167 


Since Yod is the first letter of the Creator’s name HaVaYaH (Yod-Hey-Vav- 
Hey), the beginning of the Creator’s revelation to creatures, the first degree 
of the Upper Light, the letter Yod argued for the world to be created with 
its properties, for the world would then be absolutely guaranteed complete 
correction. However, the Creator objects to it. As was already stated, the letters’ 
questions and the Creator’s answers signify the Creator playing with each letter, 
where the letters’ questions are their MAN, and the Creator’s answers are MAD 
in the form of the Upper Light. 

So, by telling Yod, “It is sufficient,” the Creator thus explained the creation of 
restriction—that the Light is only allowed to descend to its level, but no further. 
And this restriction is fixed in the Creator’s name Shadday (Shin-Dalet-Yod). After 
Yod began to spread with the great Light, the Creator stopped it, forbidding it 
to spread to the letter Tav, but only to Shin (as was said above, in item 25). He 
said to it: “Enough, and do not spread further. Otherwise you will not be able 
to remain forever in My Name HaVaYaH.” 

As the sages said: “My Name is not pronounced as it is written. For it is 
written HaVaYaH, but pronounced Adonay” (Talmud, Pesahim, 50). Indeed, 
the name HaVaYaH is not subject to change, as it is written: “For I, the Lord 
(HaVaYaH), do not change” ( Malachi, 3:6). For corruption and its correction 
emerge in the days of the world’s existence, meaning that constant changes are 
coming. Therefore, until the end of correction, the Creator is called Adonay, for 
this name is subject to change, and not HaVaYaH, which can never be altered. 

Yet, in the future, after the end of correction, HaVaYaH will be pronounced 
as it is written. Therefore, the Creator said, “If I see some fault or evil in you, 
by this you will be removed from My Name, for My Name, HaVaYaH, may not 
contain anything flawed or corrected—neither corruption nor correction. And 
this is why the world cannot be created by your properties.” There are three 
degrees in the letter Yod of the name HaVaYaH: in the Sefira Hochma of ZA, in 
Hochma of AVI, and in Hochma of Arich Anpin, called “concealed wisdom.” 

HaVaYaH begins with a dot, which then turns into Yod. Subsequently, Yod 
(Ohr Hochma) spreads to the sides and downward and turns into the letter Dalet, 
which consists of a horizontal roof-like line that indicates the property of Bina- 
Ima (mercy, Hassadim, width). When O hr Hassadim stops spreading in width, 
Ohr Hochma begins to spread downward in the form of a vertical line. This is the 
leg of the letter Dale t, the property of Hochma-Aba. 

The common property of AVI is designated by the letter Dalet. AVI beget 
ZA, designated by the letter Vav inside the Dalet, and eventually forms the shape 



168 


The Zohar 


of the letter Hey. Thus, the request of ZA (Vav) to receive from AVI compels 
them to unite their properties of Hochma (vertical line) and Hassadim (horizontal 
line), with the help of the letter Yod. Consequently, AVI receive the Light from 
Yod and pass it on to ZA. 

The screen with the desires of Malchut is called “a point,” since the collision 
between the screen and the coming Light yields Returning Light. And since the 
received Light always consists of ten Lights, the screen is called “ten points.” 

Yod designates the spreading of Nekudot inside Partzuf Keter, from the Light 
of Hochma downwards, while Vav signifies the spreading of Nekudot inside Partzuf 
Hochma. However, there is no sign in HaVaYaH that indicates the diffusion of 
Light in Keter. 

Entrance or exit of the letter Yod in a word signifies either presence or 
absence of the Light of Hochma. There are four kinds of correction: 

1. The First Ibur— conception of the small state of ZON. This is an 
absolutely passive spiritual state, where the letter Yod enters the 
word Ohr (Light) and transforms it into Avir (air), becoming the 
VAK of the Partzuf. 

2. The letter Yod exits the word Avir, which converts it back to Ohr: the 
Light of Hochma enters VAK of Partzuf; 

3. The Second Ibur—conception of the Gadlut state of ZON: AHP of 
Bina ascend from ZON to Biria, and GE de ZON ascend with them, 
for they were together in the Katnut state, defined as conception of 
GE de ZON; 

4. The diffusion of the Light of Hochma. 


THE LETTER TET 

33. The letter Tet entered and said: “Maker of the world, it would be good 
to create the world with me, for it is by me that You are called Tov (Good).” 
The Creator replied: “I will not create the world by you, for your goodness is 
concealed within you and is invisible. Therefore, it cannot take any part in 
the world that I wish to create, and will only be revealed in the world to come. 
And since your goodness is concealed within you, the gates of the palace will 
sink into the ground, for the letter Chet is opposite from you, and when you 
join together, the word CHeT (sin) will be formed. This is why these two 
letters are not recorded in the names of the holy tribes.” The letter Chet 
immediately moved aside. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


169 


The letter Tet, whose numeric value of nine, is the inner property of the 
Sefira Yesod in ZA, while the outer property of Yesod in ZA is the letter T zadik, 
whose numeric value of ninety, and it joins with Nukva de ZA, forming the 
notion of T zadik (righteous one). Besides being die inner property of Yesod in 
ZA, Tet is also the ninth letter among die letters of Bina in ZA. 

Also, Tet is called Tov (good). And since Tov is called T zadik, for it is the 
inner Light of Yesod, called Tzadik, to whom no impure forces could cling, Tet 
calls on the above to justify its claim to become the basis of the world. 

In the Talmud ( Hagiga , 12), the sages wrote: “In die Light by which the 
Creator created the world, Adam saw from one end of the world to the other. 
But the Creator saw that the deeds of the generations of the Flood and the 
builders of the Tower of Babel are detrimental, and concealed that Light for the 
righteous in the future.” Because the Creator saw that their actions will bring 
the threat of the clinging of the impure forces, He concealed this Light, Thus, 
the Light descended secretly from the Supernal Righteous (AVI) to the righteous 
one (Yesod in ZA), the letter Tet. 

And so the Creator told Tet that because He must conceal it from the sinners 
and only the righteous will be worthy of it in the world to come, it cannot 
partake in the creation and correction of the world, for the world is ZON, and 
the letter Tet is constantly in danger of being clung to by impure forces. 

And since this Light shines only secretly inside Yesod of ZA, and not 
openly, Nukva will not be able to receive this Light directly, but only through 
its concealment in her. Therefore, the gates of Nukva sink into her Sefira Yesod, 
which safeguards them against the clinging of the impure forces, and they are 
confident that the impure forces will not be able to rule over her gates. For even 
at the time of the ruin of the Temple, the impure forces could not rule over the 
gates of the Temple, and sank into the ground, that is, the ground consumed 
them. “But because you are in need of such protection, I cannot create the world 
with you,” the Creator answered Tet. 

There are two pipes (channels) in Yesod de ZA in the world of Atzilut: the 
right one serves for the birth of the souls, and the left one for throwing away 
waste to the impure forces. The letter Chet is Hod, whose property is Malchut 
in ZA, the left pipe in Yesod of ZA, for the properties of the letter Chet are the 
properties of Ku/included in Yesod, whereas Kuf emanates Ner Dakik (tiny Light) 
to the impure forces, from which they receive the strength to be similar to an 
image of a pure man, as a monkey compared to a man, for the Creator created 
purity parallel to impurity. 



170 


The Zohar 


These two pipes are located very close to each other, separated only by a thin 
partition, called “a garlic husk.” Consequently, the left pipe has the strength to 
rule over the right one, thereby forming CHeT (numerical value 8 + 9 = 17). 

The numerical value of CHeT (17) equals that of the word TOV (9 + 6 + 
2 = 17), which means that the impure force opposes the pure one. And if the 
right pipe (the letter Tet) prevails, the word CHeT (sin) will turn into TOV 
(good, goodness). 

Since the left pipe ( CHeT) has the strength to rule over the right one (Tet), 
the impure forces can suck the Upper Light for themselves. This would give 
power to the sinners of the world. This is why neither Chet nor Tet are present in 
the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, to show that they (the tribes) are above 
the letter Chet, the root of all the opposing impure forces. 

When all the letters merited receiving a blessing through the letter Bet, they 
lined up in their alphabetical order, in which the letters Tet and Reish joined. 
The letter Tet ascended, but did not take its place until the Creator asked her: 
“Tet, why did you ascend, but do not take your place?” It replied: “You created 
me to begin the words Tov (goodness) and Torah, as it is written: ‘And the 
Creator saw that the Light was good.’ How then can I join and stand beside the 
letter Reish, when it begins the word Rah (evil)?” 

The Creator answered: “Return to your place, for it is precisely you that 
needs the letter Reish. For man, whom I intend to create, combines all those 
properties—you as the right property, and Reish as the left.” After that, both Tet 
and Reish returned to their places. 

Three lines emerge in ZA of the world of Atzilut. However, they emerge from 
their source, Bina. (As a result of the second restriction, Malchut ascends to Bina, 
which leads to Sefirot Bina-ZA-Malchut falling into a lower Partzuf, into ZA.) Bina 
is called Eloh-im (Aleph-Lamed-Hey-Yod-Mem), and as a result of second restriction, 
her part Aleph-Lamed-Hey (the ELEH of the word Eloh-im, AHP) fell into a lower 
Partzuf, to ZA. Only the letters Yod-Mem (the IM of Eloh-im) remained in Bina. 
This means that only half, (VAK, GE) remained in her from the previous level of 
GAR. Whatever is left is designated by a sign called Holam—Vav with a dot above 
it, as this is the right line, Ohr Hassadim. 

Then, in the big state, the letters Aleph-Lamed-Hey (ELEH) returned to Bina 
and joined with Yod-Mem (IM). Subsequently, the level of GAR returned, yet the 
Light of Hochma in Bina was incomplete, for the Light of Hassadim disappeared 
and the Light of Hochma cannot shine without the Light of Hassadim. The 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


171 


returned letters A-L-H are Shuruk—Vav with a dot inside it, because, due to the 
restrictions in it, it constitutes the left line. 

These restrictions are effective until ZON, upon ascending to Bina, begin to 
receive the Light, and the middle line emerges and reduces GAR of Hochma in 
the left line. As a result, the right line joins with the left: O hr Hochma shines in 
the O hr Hassadim. This middle line is called Hirik—Vav with a dot under it, or 
the screen of Hirik, for the Light enters the Partzuf because of it. 

And since Bina regained GAR with ZA’s help, ZA, now that he had acquired 
the three lines, begins to receive this Light from Bina, too. Yod-Mem (1M), Tet 
and Holam constitute the right line, Aleph-Lamed-Hey ( ELEH ), Reish and Shuruk 
constitute the left. 

Now let us translate this into the language of Sefirot. When Bina returned 
once more to the state of Gadlut, ELEH returned to IM, the left line merged 
with the right, and this drove Tet (right line, Hassadim) away from Reish (left 
line). This is because being opposite to each other, they cannot stand side by 
side until the Creator (ZA, middle line) reduces the GAR of both the left and 
right lines by the force of His screen, which is expressed by the words: “And the 
Creator commanded it to return to its place.” 

GAR de Hochma is called Man’ula— the lock that prevents the Light from 
entering a Partzuf, and its diminution is called Miftacha— the key that opens a 
passage for the Light, VAK of Hochma, to spread in the left line into a Partzuf. 
Then, Tet, the right line, receives Ohr Hochma from the left, joins with Reish, 
receiving from it the Light of Hochma. Otherwise it would have remained in 
VAK. Adam, too, is created from the union of these two lines. 

But why was the letter Tet reluctant to join with the letter Reish, and had 
to be forced to do so by the Creator? In the spiritual world, a root rules over 
all its branches, and the branches submit to its rule. Therefore, Tet did not 
wish to join with Reish, as it was then bound to become a branch and submit 
to its root, Reish. 

However, the Creator wanted Tet to receive the Light of Hochma from Reish 
so that this union would enable man to receive the Light of GAR. Thus, when 
ELEH return to Bina, He made it so Bina’s restrictions would be weakened so as 
to allow the Reish to join with the Tet and receive the Light of Hassadim from it. It 
follows that Tet becomes the root with regard to Reish, for without its Hassadim, 
Reish would be unable to shine, due to the restrictions placed on its Light. 



17 2 


The Zohar 


THE LETTER ZAYIN 

34. The letter Zayin entered and said: “Maker of the world, it would be good 
to create the world by me, as Shabbat is preserved with me, for it is written: 
‘Remember (Zachor) the day of Shabbat, so as to keep it.’” The Creator 
replied: “I will not create the world by you, for within you is a force of war, as 
sabers and swords, called Klei Zayin (weaponry), are made by you. And you 
are like the letter Nun, with which the world was not created, for within it is 
Nefilah (fall)” (item 29). Having heard that, the letter Zayin left Him. 

The letter Zayin is depicted as a combination of Vav and Yod, as a head over 
it, which signifies the big state and the great Light in Malchut, ZA’s wife, for 
Malchut includes herself into her husband, ZA (designated by Vav), and becomes 
a crown (Yod) on his head. Together, these two letters, Vav with Yod standing 
above it, form the letter Zayin. 

Therefore, it is written: “Remember the day of Shabbat, so as to keep it holy.” 
As a result of Shabbat’s elevation, that is, Nukva’s ascent to the head of ZA, when 
she becomes his crown, she includes herself in the word Zachor (remember) and 
receives the name Nukva Kedoshah (holy Nukva). This is why the letter Zayin 
claimed that since this Light is so great and holy that it brings absolute rest on 
this day, for purity is completely separated from impurity in this state called 
Shabbat, it is worthy of becoming the basis for the creation of the world. 

Zayin is the Sefira Netzah in ZA. When Nukva is included in Netzah and 
merges with its properties, she gains the strength to ascend along with ZA to 
AVI. There she becomes a crown on his head, by which he is adorned, which 
signifies the day of Shabbat. However, since this correction occurs solely as a 
result of her inclusion in the male essence and their ascent to AVI, and not in 
her regular place, where she normally abides with ZA, Nukva cannot be corrected 
completely during the 6,000 years. 

The reason for this is that when Nukva returns to her place on weekdays, her 
connection with the letter Zayin is defined as a Kli Zayin (weapon), and all the wars 
with the impure forces emerge from her, like the weekdays that prepare Shabbat. 

For every man must defeat the impure force within him on the weekdays, 
and thus merit the King’s daughter—Shabbat. However, during the 6,000 years, 
the Light of Shabbat is insufficient for the neutralization of the impure forces, 
for weekdays return and surround the Shabbat. This continues until the end 
of correction, when there will be only Shabbat as the day of absolute perfection 
for all eternity. 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


173 


This is also why the Creator replied to Z ayin: “I will not create the world with 
you, for when you are in your place, your Light is not yet perfect. Only after you 
defeat the impure forces in war will man be able to attain you.” And the shape of 
the letter Vat’ (ZA) resembles a spear, ready to strike and pierce through the impure 
forces. For Gevurot (courage) signifies the left line of Bina s male part (Nun). 


THE LETTERS VAV AND HEY 

35. The letter Vav entered and said: “It would be good to create the world 
with me, for I am a letter from Your Name HaVaYaH (Yod-Hey-Vav-Hey).” 
The Creator replied: “Vav, both you and the letter Hey should just be glad to 
be contained within My Name. This is why I will not create the world with 
your properties.” 

Although the letter Yod expressed a similar request, Vav thought that Yod 
had been turned down because of its excessive size (spiritual force). This is why 
Vav claimed that it would be good to create the world with its properties, i.e., 
according to the letters Vav-Hey in the name HaVaYaH, with the Light of the 
Supernal Bina (Ima ) of the world of A tzilut. 

The Creator responded with the same answer he had given to the letter 
Yod—that He restricted it by saying to DaY (Dalet-Yod): “Stop at the letter Shin 
and spread no more, so that the impure forces would not cling to you.” Hence, 
the letters Vav and Hey are not suitable for the world to be created with their 
properties, for even they need protection against the impure forces. 

Sefira Tifferet is designated by the big letter Vav (Vav with a head), for it has 
all six (Vav) Sefirot: Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod. Yesod is the Sefira that is 
responsible for passing the Light from ZA to Malchut. This is why it has the same 
Light as in Malchut—NHY without HGT, and this is also why Yesod is called the 
small Vav (Vav without a head). 


THE LETTERS D ALET AND QIMEL 

36. The letters Dalet and Qimel appeared before the Creator. However, the 
Creator told them right away: “It is enough that you are both together, so that 
as long as the poor exist on earth, there is someone to treat them with mercy 
(LiQmol Hesed).” The letter Dalet derives from Dalut (poverty), while Qimel 
renders mercy to it (Qomelet Hassadim). “Therefore, you cannot part, and it 
is enough for you to aid one another in this way.” 



174 


The Zohar 


It was already stated (item 24) that although Dalet receives the Light from 
Gimel and its sharp right angle protrudes from the Light of Hassadim, the impure 
forces are nonetheless strong enough to cling to it, separate it and make the 
sharp angle smooth, thus transforming it into the letter Reish. 

This is why the letter Dalet requires special protection so as not to be 
corrupted and to be able to continue being fulfilled by Gimel so as to keep the 
needy ones ( Dalut ) in the world from disappearing. Thus, it is sufficient for 
these two forces to sustain and complement one another, to fulfill one another 
in reciprocal union so as to prevent the impure forces from ruling. And this 
role is enough from them. This is why the Creator did not want to create the 
world with them. 


THE LETTER BET 

37. The letter Bet entered and said to the Creator: “Maker of the world, it 
would be good to create the world by me, as by me You are blessed Above and 
below. For Bet is Berachah (blessing).” The Creator replied to Bet: “Of course, 
I will create the world by you, and you shall be the basis of the world!” 

The letter Bet is the property of Hochma (wisdom), or rather Hesed in Hochma, 
a point in a palace, for Ohr Hassadim is a palace for Ohr Hochma and is called 
Berachah (blessing). Passing through all of the worlds from the Creator down to 
the lowest degree of the lowest world, this Light does not diminish in any way. 

Rather, just as this Light is at the Highest Degree that receives it from the 
World of Infinity, it is just as great, magnificent, and mighty in the world of 
Atzilut, and likewise all the way down to the world of Assiya. And it does not get 
coarser or weaker as it passes through all the screens from Above downwards. 

That is why the letter Bet vied for the world to be created with its properties, 
as the Light of blessing is the same both Above and below; no screen can weaken 
it and no coarse desires can harm it. 

This is also why the property of mercy ( Hassadim ) is most suitable for the 
creation of the world, for no impure forces can cling to it. This is because the 
impure forces can only cling to a place where there is a deficiency. And since 
there is no deficiency of any kind in the property of mercy, there can never be 
any contact between Bet and the impure forces. 

The Creator agreed with Bet that its property is perfect and suitable for 
the creation of the universe by Him. As it is said: “O lam (world) Hesed (mercy) 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


175 


YiBaneh (will be built),” where YiBaneh means Boneh (building) and HaVana 
(understanding). (In Hebrew, the letters Vav and Bet are denoted by die letter 
Bet). This is because die Creator determined drat this property is entirely 
sufficient for precisely evaluating and separating pure from impure. 

And if man seeks an idol in the Creator’s stead, a Berachah (blessing) does 
not descend upon him, for blessing stems from the Creator alone. Thus, it is 
possible to determine who is righteous and who is a sinner, who works for the 
Creator’s sake and who works for himself, for the world is built by mercy. 

Yet, the Creator did not order the Light of Mercy to rule the world. He merely 
intended it for a good beginning, sufficient to bring the world to perfection. This 
is because the Light of Hassadim is incomplete (VAK, and not GAR), insufficient 
for begetting new souls, for their union and multiplication, as no Partzuf (spiritual 
object) can beget until it attains the full Light of Hochma, termed GAR or head. 
Until then, the Partzuf remains in a state of imperfection. 

Our normal (the lowest possible) state is determined by the property of the 
letter Bet. Hence, the Creator laid it as the basis for the creation of the world. In 
other words, the basis of a state is a state of a pure Partzuf (object), when nothing 
at all can diminish or impede it. 

In such a state, an addition of Ohr Hochma to O hr Hassadim, necessary for 
the birth of a new Partzuf is no longer considered basic and essential. Rather, it 
is defined as an addition, i.e., it depends solely on the good deeds of the lower 
ones. And the fundamental Light, VAK, will never be lacking. 


THE LETTER A LEPH 

38. The letter Aleph stood outside and did not enter to appear before the 
Creator. The Creator said to it: “Why do you not come to me like all the 
other letters?” Aleph replied: “Because I saw all the letters leaving your 
presence without the desired answer. And besides, I saw You presenting the 
letter Bet with this great gift. And, indeed, the King of the universe cannot 
take back his gift and give it to another!” The Creator replied: “Although I 
will create the world by the letter Bet, it is you who will stand at the head 
of all the letters, and there shall be no unity in Me, but through you alone; 
all accounts and deeds of this world shall always begin with you, and all of 
unity shall be in you alone.” 

As we already know, all the letters’ questions are Aliyat MAN—their individual 
requests, prayers, desires to ascend to the Creator. And die Creator’s answers 



176 


The Zohar 


to them are called Yeridat MAD—the descent of the Light from Above, giving 
strength and abundance according to the letters’ requests. The great perfection 
in the letter Aleph stems not from the lower ones’ request for spiritual ascent and 
correction, but from a force (Light) descending from Above and elevating those 
that dwell below. 

This is why from the beginning of correction to its end, Aleph (unlike the 
other letters, whose properties fuel the process of correction during the 6,000 
years) is never stimulated to raise its request to the Creator. And only if the Light 
that bestows strength for spiritual ascent descends from Above and begins to 
shine upon Aleph will it be stimulated. However, this will only take place at the 
end of correction. 

Aleph did not raise its plea (MAN) to the Creator, for it saw that all the other 
letters asked, but to no avail, for there was an opposite property in the system 
of the impure forces against each of their properties. Therefore, Aleph decided 
that it was no better than the rest, that there is a corresponding impure force 
against it as well. 

Furthermore, it raised no requests (MAN) to the Creator because it saw that 
the Creator decided to create the world with the letter Bet, mercy. And since it 
had no doubt that His decision was irrevocable, it decided not to ask Him. 

Although it is true that the world was already created with the property of 
Bet, and that the Creator will not turn His gift over to another letter, the Partzuf 
that was created by the property of Bet is incomplete, small, VAK without a head. 
And since a Partzuf needs a head in order to reach the state of Gadlut, which is 
possible only when the Partzuf is filled not only with the Light of Mercy ( Has- 
sadim ), but also with the Light of Wisdom ( Hochma ), more letters are necessary 
for the connection, conception and birth of a new Partzuf, a new state. 

A state of Gadlut can only be achieved with the help of the property of the 
letter Aleph. Only Aleph can bring a Partzuf to Gadlut, to supplement its body, 
VAK, with a head, GAR, Mochin— the Light of Hochma. The letter Aleph brings 
the union between ZA and Malchut in a face-to-face position, whereas previously, 
in Katnut, while being filled with only the Light of Mercy, ZA and Malchut were 
connected back-to-back. This is why Aleph creates a head for all the letters, and 
hence stands at the head of the alphabet. 

The Creator said: “That is why My Unity in the world is expressed only through 
the property of the letter Aleph. Furthermore, all rewards and punishments, 
distancing and drawing nearer, as well as the aspiration for spiritual correction 
(Teshuvah), all of which lead to the achievement of the end of correction, will 



The Letters of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba 


177 


only happen by the property of the Aleph. I have made Bet the basis of the Partzuf 
so that it would be in no way dependent on the deeds of the lower ones. Thus, 
even if they begin to sin, those above will remain unaffected.” 

He continued: “But the Light in you, Aleph, is directly related to the actions 
of the lower ones. So if they sin, the Light of Wisdom (the Light of GAR in 
you) will immediately disappear. But if they correct their actions (T eshuvah), the 
Light of Hochma will return. And My unity with all the creatures at the end of 
correction will only be realized through the letter Aleph.” 

Letters are Kelim (plural for Kli— vessel), desires. And this refers to both the 
individual letters of the alphabet and those that form words. In the names of 
spiritual objects, letters signify the force of their desire, which the Light can fill. 
Letters of a simple name, without filling, designate its basis without Light—Kli 
of Aviut zero with the Light of Nefesh. Letters of a fulfilled name designate the 
magnitude of desires that are filled by Light. 

There are two sources of letters: Yod and Aleph. Yod is a genuine source, for 
when we write something, we begin with a dot (Yod), and then, as we proceed 
from the dot in one of the four directions, we get a line. Letters are Kelim, 
desires, in which the Light (pleasure) is received. 

A desire for something specific may only emerge if: (i) the initial, still 
unconscious desire is filled with delight, and (ii) the delight exits the desire. 
It is the memories (Reshimot) of past pleasures that lead to the emergence of a 
true desire to receive it, to feel it once more. And this is the very desire that 
is called Kli. 

A filled Kli cannot be called a desire, for it is satisfied. Therefore, expulsion of 
the Light and sensation of spiritual descent constitute the period of the creation 
of new Kelim for future receptions of Light, for new attainments. Because the 
first restriction is the reason for the disappearance of Light from all the vessels, 
its black dot, Yod, is the basis of all the letters-Kelim. 

However, the second restriction is the only true root of all the worlds, 
because the first restriction was only made on a point, (Phase Four, Malchut, 
the fourth letter Hey in the Creator’s name HaVaYaH). The second restriction, 
however, was made on Bina, in whom the two points, Bina and Malchut, were 
joined. The union of the two points forms a line, either vertical or horizontal. If 
it is a horizontal line, it is called “firmament” or Parsa. 

The sum of consequences of both the first and second restrictions forms 
a slanted line (\); GE ( Keter-Hochma ) is depicted to its right, and AHP ( Bina- 
ZA-Malchut) to its left. Keter-Hochma remain on their previous level and are 




178 


The Zohar 


designated by the letter Yod, the first root of the world, whereas, a result of the 
second restriction, designated by a slanted line (\), Bina-ZA-Malchut fell to a lower 
level. And since the letter Yod is the first, though a very remote root of the worlds, 
and all the worlds were created afterwards and in accordance with the law of the 
second restriction, the letter Aleph stands at the head of the alphabet. 

The kind of Light that fills the spiritual Kli or Partzuf can also be seen from 
its designation: if it is filled with the Light of Wisdom (O hr Hochma ), the filling 
is designated by the letter Yod; and if it is filled with the Light of Mercy (O hr 
Hassadim ), it is the letter Aleph. 

39. The Creator made the Upper letters, which refer to the Sefira Bina, 
large, and the lower letters that refer to Malchut— small. Therefore it is said: 
“Beresheet Barah” (in the beginning He created)—two words that begin with 
Bet, and then Elokim Et (the Creator Himself)—two words that begin with 
Aleph. The first set of Aleph and Bet are letters of Bina, and the second set 
of Aleph and Bet are letters of Malchut. And they should mutually affect one 
another with their properties. 

When the Upper One wishes to give Light to the lower one, it should clothe 
in the lower one, signified by the first two letters Bet and the two letters Aleph 
in the first four words of the Torah. For the first, Upper Bet is Bina, the second, 
lower Bet is ZA, and the first Bet clothes into the second one. 

Similarly, the first Aleph refers to Bina and clothes into the second Aleph in 
ZA so as to fill it with Light. Therefore, the two letters Bet are like one letter Bet 
and the two letters Aleph are like one letter Aleph, since the lower letter merely 
constitutes the influence of the Upper One, which tells us that the Upper Partzuf 
fills the lower one. 

The world cannot be created with Aleph, for the word Arm (cursed) begins 
with it, and had the world been created with Aleph, the impure forces, called 
“cursed,” would have received great power from the pure forces, called Baruch 
(blessed). This is why the world ( Nukva of ZA) is created with the letter Bet. 
Likewise, Adam in Nukva of ZA is also created by the power of Bet. Thus, Malchut 
of the world of Atzilut constitutes the root of all creation, all the worlds, and all 
that inhabit them. 



Supernal Wisdom 


40. Rabbi Yudai asked, “What does the word BERESHEET mean?” It is 
the wisdom, upon which the world, ZA, is established to enter the concealed 
supernal secrets, namely the Light of Bina. Here are the six Supernal and 
great properties, VAK de Bina, from which everything emerges. The six river 
mouths, VAK de ZA, that flow into the Great Sea (Malchut) were formed from 
them. The word BERESHEET consists of the words BARAH (created) and 
SHEET (Aramaic: six), meaning that six properties were created. Who created 
them? He who is unmentioned, concealed, and unknown: Arich Anpin. 

There are two types of Ohr Hochma (Light of Wisdom) in the world of Atzilut: 

1. The original Light, Ohr Hochma of AA, called “the concealed Ohr 
Hochma.” This Light of Hochma is present only in Partzuf AA and 
does not spread to the lower Partzufim. 

2. Ohr Hochma that descends via thirty-two paths from Bina, who ascended 
to Rosh de AA to receive Ohr Hochma and pass it to ZA. Hence, the 
word Bereshee t means Be-Reshee t, with -Hochma. However, this is not 
the true Ohr Hochma that is concealed in AA, but rather the Light that 
descends via thirty-two paths from Bina to ZA and sustains ZON. 

It is written that the world is established on the “concealed supernal secrets,” 
for when ZON (called “world”) receive the Light of Hochma of thirty-two paths, 
they ascend to AVI, the concealed supernal secrets. Hence, it is said that ZON 
enter the concealed supernal secrets and attain the degree of AVI, as the lower 
one that ascends to the Upper One becomes equal to it in its properties. 

The word BERESHEET, besides being divided into BE-RESHEET, is also 
divided into BARAH-SHEET (in Hebrew, both words are spelled the same), 
which translates as CREATED SIX—created six Sefirot (properties), called VAK 
(abbreviation of the words Vav Ketzavot, six extremities/properties of ZA, from 
which all creatures emerge). 


179 



180 


The Zohar 


The Sefira Bina fulfills the function of the Sefira Hochma, the source of Ohr 
Hochma for ZA. Because Malchut ascended to Bina, and Bina departed from Rosh 
de AA and became like its Gu/(body), she cannot receive the Ohr Hochma of AA. 

But then, thanks to the MAN raised by the lower ones, human beings who 
are spiritually present in the worlds of BYA, Bina returns to Rosh de AA, receives 
Ohr Hochma from AA, passes it to ZON, and ZON pass it to all the worlds. It 
follows that all the worlds emerged from these six properties (extremities), into 
which Bina was divided. 

It is therefore written that all six riverheads originate from Bina, and descend 
into the Great Sea. Bina’s division into six properties, VAK, when she exits Rosh 
de AA, is called “six sources,” for this is only a source of Light for ZA. But then, 
when Bina returns to Rosh de AA, they become Ohr Hochma, called the rivers that 
descend to Partzuf ZA. 

And they are called “six rivers,” as it is written: “He will drink off the brook 
in the way; therefore, will he lift up the head” ( Tehilim, 110:7). Afterwards, ZA 
passes this Light into the Great Sea, to his Nukva. The rivers and brooks signify 
the Light of ZA. VAK de Bina is considered the sources of the Light of Wisdom, 
Hochma, for it emerged from Bina in the form of VAK with the sole purpose of 
creating a source of Light for ZON. And had Bina not emerged, ZON would 
have had no chance of receiving the Light. 

The word Beresheet has several meanings: Bere = Barah— created six properties 
without Ohr Hochma, as the word Barah signifies concealment. Hence, the word 
Beresheet has two meanings: 

1. Hochma, as the word Resheet means Hochma. 

2. Barah Sheet, which shows how the Sefira Hochma was divided into six 
parts without a Rosh, without Ohr Hochma. These six parts are the 
source of Light for ZON (called the “world”), and these six parts of ZA 
together with Malchut are called the “seven days of creation.” 

However, since the word Barah is inside the word Beresheet, this means that 
it was created by “Him who is concealed and unknown,” i.e., the concealed 
Hochma of Arich Anpin, for it expelled Bina from its Rosh and turned her into 
VAK. In other words, it created the six parts described in Beresheet. 

Beresheet designates Hochma. The Light cannot descend to ZA until Ima-Bina 
comes outside, for because of Tzimtzum Bet, ZAT de Bina fell to ZON. Hence, when 
Bina is in Gadlut, ZA receives Ohr Hochma in his Kelim, the desires of Bina. The word 
Barah in Beresheet = Barah Sheet also means Bar (Hebrew, to exit, to transcend). 



The Lock and the Key 


41. Rabbi Chiya and Rabbi Yosi were walking along a road. As they reached a 
field, Rabbi Chiya said to Rabbi Yosi, “The words BARAH SHEET (created 
six) certainly allude to BE RESHEET, for the six Supernal Days, VAKde Bina, 
shine on the Torah (ZA), while the others, QAR de Bina, are concealed.” 

ZA of the world of Atzilut is called the Torah. The six Supernal Days are VAK 
de Bina that are above ZA. Hence, the first word of the Torah, BERESHEET = 
BARAH (created) and SHEET (six) indicates that the Sefira Bina turns to the 
Sefira Hochma in order to receive Ohr Hochma and pass it to ZA. Since ZA is 
unable to receive all the Ohr Hochma (GAR de Hochma, the Light of the ten 
Sefirot) from Bina, but only VAK de Hochma (Light of six Sefirot), this is stressed 
in the word BARAH SHEET—CREATED SIX. This means that ZA receives 
from Bina the Light of only six Sefirot, HGT NHY or VAK de Hochma, whereas 
GAR de Hochma, the Light of Sefirot KHB, is concealed from him. 

The reason for this is that although Partzuf Atik belongs to Tzimtzum Aleph 
(the first restriction), it is obliged to shine down on all the other Partzufim of 
the world of Atzilut, and on all the worlds BYA with the Light of Tzimtzum Bet. 
Therefore, with regards to the lower Partzufim, it appears as a Partzuf that belongs 
to Tzimtzum Bet. 

In other words, it deliberately imposed on itself an outward (with regards to 
others) restriction of its Light, to enable the lower Partzufim to receive from it. 
Hence, it elevated Malchut from the Peh to the Eynaim and made a Z ivug on the 
screen that stands in Nikvey Eynaim, thus begetting Partzuf AA. 

This is why AA is a Partzuf with properties of the second restriction, and 
acts as Keter of the entire world of Atzilut instead of Atik. This was designed 
so by Partzuf Atik itself, which split into two parts: GE remained in Atik, and 
AHP became part of the second Partzuf, AA. And since Malchut ascended to NE 


181 



182 


The Zohar 


(Nikvey Eynaim), Partzuf AA remained without Malchut, the Sefira Ateret Yesod 
was used in its stead, and Malchut became concealed in the NE of Partzuf Atik. 
Also, GE de Atik became concealed from the lower Partzufim, Malchut stood in 
NE of Rosh de Atik, AHP de Atik became GE de AA, and Ateret Yesod became 
Malchut de AA. 

All the subsequent Partzufim of the world of Atzilut emerged similar to 
these Partzufim. Thus, they all split into two parts, GE and AHP: Partzuf Bina 
was split into two Partzufim: GE de Bina formed Partzuf AVI and AHP de Bina 
formed Partzuf YES HSUT. Malchut ascended and remained in AVI, while Partzuf 
YESHSUT remained without Malchut. 

The same applies to ZON: GE formed the big ZON and AHP formed the 
small ZON. Malchut remained in NE of the big ZON, while the small ZON have 
only nine Se/irot without Malchut, which is replaced in them by Ateret Yesod, as in 
Partzuf Atik. Therefore, just as Keter (Atik) split into two parts: GAR = Atik and 
ZAT = AA, so was Bina divided into GAR = AVI and ZAT = YESHSUT, and ZON 
into GAR = the big ZON and ZAT = the small ZON: Malchut remained in GAR 
and Ateret Yesod replaced it in ZAT. 

As a result, the Upper Part of each degree remains concealed, just like Partzuf 
Atik, for Malchut does not descend from the place where she had ascended (NE) 
to her previous place in the Peh. And although in Gadlut, AHP return to their 
place or ascend to their own GE (which is one and the same), GE do not become 
filled with Ohr Hochma (the Light of GAR) as a result, since Malchut remains 
concealed in GE. Moreover, Malchut exists under the ban of Tzimtzum Aleph on 
the reception of Ohr Hochma. Hence, GE remain with Ohr Hassadim. 

Only the lower part of each degree is filled with the Light of GAR ( Hochma) 
in Gadlut: there was Avir (air) = Aleph-Vav-Yod-Reish, then the letter Yod departed 
from this word, and only the letters Aleph-Vav-Reish remained to form the word 
Ohr (Light)— Ohr Hochma or GAR. 

It follows that all Partzufim of the world of Atzilut have GE, GAR of Kelim, 
Sefirot KHB HGT with Ohr Hassadim, the Light of VAK, whereas AHP, Sefirot 
NHY, Vak de Kelim in the Gadlut of the Partzuf are filled with Ohr Hochma, 
the Light of GAR. GE (GAR de Kelim) are filled with the Light of VAK (Ohr 
Hassadim), and AHP (VAK de Kelim) are filled with the Light of GAR (Ohr 
Hochma). It is therefore said that there’s no greater Light for ZA in the world 
of Atzilut than the Light of VAK = six days, while GAR are concealed even in 
the Partzufim above ZA. 



The Lock and the Key 


183 


42. However, it is said in the secrets of creation of BERESHEET that He 
who is Holy and Concealed established the laws in Bina, in the secret and 
concealed, meaning Malchut of PartzufAtik, which is a Partzuf with Malchut 
of T zimtzum Aleph, who ascended to Bina and removed AHP de AA below 
its Rosh. And the same law that He established in Bina He established and 
concealed within, and everything is locked under one key. And He hid this key 
in a hall. And although everything is hidden in that hall, the most important 
thing is in that key, for it locks and unlocks everything. 

HE WHO IS HOLY AND CONCEALED is AA, for its Hochma is concealed. 
THE LAWS ARE ESTABLISHED IN IT, meaning in Malchut de Atik. The 
deficiency of the Kelim de AHP is confirmed. Malchut of Tzimtzum Aleph, called 
“the central point of all creation,” is also the sole creation on which Tzimtzum 
Aleph was imposed. Contrary to her, if the screen stands not in Malchut, but in 
Yesod or, more precisely, in Ateret Yesod, the place of the covenant (circumcision), 
the place of the Zivug that was permitted after Tzimtzum Bet, this screen allows 
for the reception of Light. Hence, it is called the “point of population,” and not 
the “central point.” 

- Keter 

- Hochma 

- Bina 

- ZA Yesod 

- ZA—Malchut that received ZA’s properties to “bestow,” the popu¬ 

lated place 

- Malchut—no Zivug can be made; the deserted place 

The thing is that there is no GAR in AA, for the Supernal Malchut of Atik, 
within AA, is already corrected to the point of being in NE of her own Partzuf. 
In Gadlut, the screen descends from NE to Peh, which makes AHP return to 
their place, and a Zivug transpires on all ten Sefirot, which receive the GAR of 
the Light, Ohr Hochma. 

Therefore, the screen in NE is called a “lock,” for it blocks the entry of GAR 
of the Light into the Partzuf. The GAR of the Light are called Ohr Hochma. Yet, 
by descending from NE to Peh, the screen lets the Light into the Partzuf, and is 
therefore called Nikvey Eynaim (pupils of the eyes). 

Although Atik itself is in NE together with Malchut, it affects AA, and not 
Atik itself, as AA was created by the screen, located not in Malchut, but in Ateret 
Yesod (or simply in Yesod), and there is no Malchut in it. This is why it is not 



184 


The Zohar 


Malchut that rules in NE de AA, but Ateret Yesod. And this is why, unlike the 
Light of Atik, its Light can be attained, for Malchut in At ik is the central point, 
which does not make a Zivug on Ohr Hochma. Although with regards to At ik, AA 
is AHP of Atik, AA itself has its own GE and AHP. 

Subsequently, AA created AVI and confirmed the absence of O hr Hochma in 
them, due to the absence of AHP de Kelim. These AHP are the HALL in which 
the entire Light of Hochma is concealed (GAR de Neshama, GAR de Haya, and 
GAR de Yechida). This KEY IS KEPT HIDDEN IN A HALL: Bina is a hall for 
Ohr Hochma. Malchut ascends to GAR de Bina (AVI) and rules there, but the 
absence of Ohr Hochma is not felt there, for the properties of AVI want only Ohr 
Hassadim; this is what is important to them, as it completely substitutes the Ohr 
Hochma. And VAK de Bina is ruled by the key, Ateret Yesod. 

IN THAT KEY, FOR IT LOCKS AND UNLOCKS EVERYTHING— 
concealments and revelations are made by Malchut that stands in NE: when 
Malchut ascends to NE she conceals Ohr Hochma, since in such a case, the Partzuf 
remains without its Kelim of AHP—it cannot use its desires to “receive” for the 
Creator’s sake. Consequently, it contains no Ohr Hochma, for Ohr Hochma can 
only be received in Kelim de AHP. 

And when a Partzuf receives strength from Above to resist the egoistic 
desires of reception of its Kelim de AHP, and can receive for the Creator’s sake, 
this means that it has acquired a screen against its desires, and can also work 
with them for the Creator. It then brings its Malchut back from the NE to the 
Peh. Put differently, it elevates its Kelim (desires of AHP) to the Rosh and begins 
to calculate how much Light it can receive within them for the Creator’s sake. 
However, the received pleasure must not be too great, or it will make the Partzuf 
enjoy it egoistically. Afterwards, the Partzuf receives Ohr Hochma in its Guf. 

Thus, only Malchut that stands in NE allows or forbids the Light from 
entering the Partzuf. And since she must let the Light into the Partzuf in ZAT 
(where the rule belongs not to Malchut that ascended to NE, but to Ateret Yesod, 
called “key”), whereas the GAR of each Partzuf remain with Ohr Hassadim (they 
desire only the Light of Hassadim), letting the Light in or preventing it from 
entering the Partzuf depends only on the key, and not on Malchut herself. 

43. That hall conceals tremendous treasures piled one upon the other. And 
there are fifty tightly closed gates in that hall, which are meant to block 
access to the Light. They were divided into four sides and became forty-nine 
gates, for one gate has no side, and it is unknown whether it exists above or 
below. Hence, it remained closed. 



The Lock and the Key 


185 


There are many types of GAR: GAR of Ohr Neshama, Haya, or Yechida. Each 
of them contains countless individual degrees and details. Hence, it is written, 
ONE UPON THE OTHER. Yet, as long as Malchut stands in NE, all these 
degrees of Light remain concealed and unknown. 

A gate signifies a vessel—a desire to receive the Light. In the spiritual world, 
there are no bodies, only desires. The desire itself is called “a body.” If there is no 
desire, there is no body, as there is no vessel to receive the Light (pleasure). The 
bigger the desire, the “bigger” the body. However, all the bodies are similar in 
structure; just as a human body in our world consists of 613 parts, the spiritual 
body consists of 613 spiritual parts (desires). 

If one is able to use one of the desires of his spiritual body for the Creator’s 
sake, such action is referred to as a Mitzva (commandment, good deed). The 
received Light is called “Torah.” 

A spiritual Partzuf has a Rosh (head), the place where decisions are made. 
It contains only those desires that are known to be fit with a screen (resistance 
to the desires) to use them spiritually, altruistically, and to “reverse” them from 
“for one’s own sake” to “for the sake of the Creator.” If one has fulfilled all 613 
commandments of the Torah and the seven Mitzvot (plural for Mitzva) of the 
nations of the world (620 Mitzvot in all), he thereby ascends 620 degrees and 
completely merges with the Creator. 

To observe all the commandments means to completely fill one’s spiritual 
Partzuf with the Light of the Torah by fulfilling observant commandments 
(Mitzvot Aseh—positive Mitzvot) and prohibitory commandments (Mitzvot Lo 
Taaseh— negative Mitzvot). The fulfillment of the later lies in the unwillingness to 
receive the pleasure that is found within them. 

There are two types of desires or gates: when they are closed and receive 
nothing, and when they open and receive the Upper Light. When they are 
all closed, there are fifty of them. However, only forty-nine of the fifty can be 
opened. There are ten Sefirot KHB HGT NHYM or five Sefirot KHB ZA-M (as ZA 
consists of six Sefirot HGT NHY). However, Malchut also consists of these six, 
and hence includes all ten Sefirot. And since each of the five Sefirot consists of 
ten, in all they make up fifty. 

However, since a Z ivug is made not on Malchut, but on Ateret Yesod, Malchut 
de Malchut itself does not receive the Light. Instead, Light is received by the four 
Sefirot KHB ZA that precede Malchut. Each of them consists of ten, hence 4 x 10 = 
40 plus nine Sefirot from Keter to Yesod in Malchut herself yields 40 + 9 = 49. 



186 


The Zohar 


Only one Sefira (Malchut de Malchut) out of the fifty does not receive the 
Light. This is because until all the Kelim (desires) have been completely corrected, 
the Light cannot enter it, as it is known in advance drat Malchut de Malchut has 
no strength to oppose such a powerful egoistic desire to receive pleasure. 

Instead of being in Malchut de Malchut, die screen stands in Yesod de 
Malchut, and this place is called Brith (Covenant), die place where die Mitzva of 
circumcision must be kept, so as to make a Zivug not on Malchut herself (on die 
first restriction), but on Yesod, or rather, Ateret Yesod (on die second restriction). 
Malchut de Malchut itself is called “Shaar Nun” (die 50 th gate). This refers to 
Malchut of each Partzuf in the worlds ABYA. 

And although Malchut of Partzuf AVI descends from NE de AVI to her place 
in Peh, while AHP and YESHSUT that clothe them ascend to the degree of 
AVI, and AVI merges with YESHSUT into one Partzuf, as a result of which, 
O hr Hochma descends to them from AA, AVI are unwilling and therefore do 
not receive anything from O hr Hochma, and remain only with Ohr Hassadim, as 
though Malchut had never even descended from Eynaim to Peh. 

Therefore, it is impossible to tell by the Light of AVI whether Malchut is 
located at the NE or at the Peh. On the contrary, by looking at AVI, it always 
seems to us that Malchut stands at NE. Only by the state of YESHSUT can we 
determine Malchut’s location, for when she ascends to AVI in Gadlut (big state), 
YESHSUT receive Ohr Hochma. 

Although Malchut herself can receive Ohr Hochma in AVI, since AVI receive 
no Ohr Hochma whatsoever, they do not utilize their own Malchut. Since 
YESHSUT already has Ateret Yesod instead of Malchut, it receives the Light or 
“opens up,” whereas AVI remain closed. 

However, the absence of the 50 th gate, the Zivug on Malchut herself in 
YESHSUT, causes the absence of the corresponding Light of Hochma in all the 
Partzufim. It is written about it: “fifty gates of Bina, and all are given to Moshe, 
except for one, the last secret of the absence of the Upper Light.” For this 
Upper Light can be received only within the Kelim (desires) of Malchut herself, 
of primordial egoism, which will occur at the end of all the corrections, at the 
completion of the 6,000 years. 

44. Those gates have one lock with a narrow space inside for inserting the 
key. It is unmarked, and recognized only by the impress of the key, which is 
unknown in that narrow space, but only in the key itself. And it is written of 
this secret: BERESHEET BARAH ELOKIM (IN THE BEGINNING THE 
CREATOR CREATED). “In the beginning” is the key, and all is concealed 



The Lock and the Key 


187 


within it, as it unlocks and locks. And six gates are contained in this key, 
which locks and unlocks. When it locks those gates, encloses them within 
itself, it is written IN THE BEGINNING (BERESHEET): a revealed word, 
though it is usually concealed. BARAH (CREATED) is a concealed word 
everywhere, implying that the key unlocks it and locks it up. 

Malchut that stands in NE is called a “lock,” for she prevents Ohr Hochma 
from entering the Partzuf. The entire Partzuf ends in Hochma (the Light can only 
be in K-H). Hence, it is merely Nefesh-Ruach. After all, in the absence of Kelim- 
Sefirot B-ZA-M, the Lights Neshama-Haya-Yechida are absent. Yesod de Malchut is 
the 49 th gate, the maximum that can be before the end of correction, for Malchut 
de Malchut itself is the 50 th gate. 

If the key ( Ateret Yesod of the Light) enters Yesod de Malchut (the 49 th gate), 
then this Light lowers Malchut to her place, from NE to Peh. This Light opens 
the Partzuf and Ohr Hochma fills it. This is why Ateret Yesod is called a “key.” 

However, there is a special Reshimo that allows one to not use Malchut de 
Malchut as a place of Zivug before the final correction of all the others (except 
for Malchut de Malchut, Kelim-desires). This Reshimo is in AVL since they never 
receive Ohr Hochma (they do not use this key), their real AHP do not ascend. 
Nevertheless, even their false AHP is sufficient to let YESHSUT receive Ohr 
Hochma and realize that knowledge signifies the presence of Ohr Hochma. 

If the Light that corresponds to Ateret Yesod enters the corresponding Sefira 
in Malchut (in Yesod de Malchut, the 49 th Sefira), then Malchut (the 50 th gate) does 
not forbid this Light to fill the Partzuf, does not “lock up” the Partzuf, as she 
contains the Reshimo of prohibition only on that which enters Malchut herself. 
The reason for it is that the Reshimo (the key’s memory) rules in ZAT de Bina, 
that is, in YESHSUT. Hence, this Light is called a “key.” 

And the word BERESHEET-IN THE BEGINNING-includes in itself only 
the key (Ateret Yesod, the 49 th Sefira ), excluding Malchut de Malchut, the 50 th gate. 
However, none of the Sefirot KHB of all the Partzufim of the world of Atzilut 
receive Ohr Hochma; Ohr Hassadim shines within them instead. 

Therefore, the words IN THE BEGINNING CREATED ( BERESHEET 
BARAH) mean CONCEALED HOCHMA, for the word BARAH (created) is 
derived from the notion of BAR (beyond), which signifies moving Malchut de 
Malchut beyond the reception of Ohr Hochma ; hence, this part of the Kelim was 
locked up by the absence of Light. 




Avraham 


45. Rabbi Yosi said, “I heard from the great source of Light, i.e., from Rabbi 
Shimon Bar-Yochai, that BARAH is a concealed word, the key to which locked 
it up and did not unlock it. And since the key locked up the word BARAH, 
there was no world and no possibility of its existence, and nothingness enveloped 
all. And when nothingness rules, there is no world, nor its existence.” 

46. So when did this key unlock those gates, and everything became ready for 
the existence and evolution of the generations? When Avraham appeared, 
as he is the property of Hesed (mercy), of which it is written, “These are 
the generations of Heaven and earth Be-Hibar’am (with which He built).” 
However, one should pronounce the word not as Be-Hibar’am, but as 
Be-Avraham (in Hebrew, these two words consist of the same letters, but in 
a slightly different order). Then, all that was concealed in the word BARAH 
was revealed as letters, meaning that the Kelim opened up to listen. And there 
appears the Pillar of Procreation, the sacred Yesod, upon which the world’s 
existence is based, for the word BARAH consists of the same letters as the 
word AVAR (passed). 

He asks: “When it is revealed, can one act and produce generations?” This 
question includes three questions: 

1. When will it be revealed? When Malchut descends from the Eynaim 
(where she ascended as a result of Tzimtzum Bet) to her previous 
place in the Peh, which leads to the revelation of the forty-nine gates 
of Hochma; 

2. When can it be used? When Ohr Hochma clothes in Ohr Hassadim, as 
a result of which AHP can receive O hr Hochma, for unless it is clothed 
in Ohr Hassadim, MI = GE cannot shine within ELEH = AHP, as the 
Light is not yet suitable for reception and use by the lower ones; 


189 



190 


The Zohar 


3. What does it mean to produce, multiply generations? Generations 
are the souls that exist in the worlds BYA, begotten by ZA de Atzilut. 
After ZA receives the Lights of Hochma and Hassadim (the Light of 
perfection), this Light enables him to make a Z ivug with Nukva and 
beget the souls of the righteous. 


WORLD OF AK 

WORLD OF ATZILUT: AA of the world of Atzilut 


AVI of the world of Atzilut 

ZON of the world of Atzilut produce and feed the souls of the righteous 
- Parsa- 


WORLD OF BERIA 
WORLD OF YETZIRA 
WORLD OR ASSIYA 


the souls of the righteous in the worlds BYA 


- Machsom, the transition from egoism to altruism 

OUR EGOISTIC WORLD 


Avraham is the property of the Sefira Hesed in PartzufZA during its Gadlut (big 
state), when Hesed ascends and becomes Hochma: Sefirot HGT become HBD: 


PARTZUF ZA 



HBD (. HaBaD ) 


HGT (. HaGaT) 


NHY (NeHY) 











Avraham 


191 


Before Avraham appeared, everything was concealed in the word BARAH 
and nothingness ruled over the world—there was neither Ohr Hochma nor Ohr 
Hassadim in ZON. However, when Avraham (the Light of Hesed that descends 
to ZA) appeared, the gates were opened for Ohr Hochma, for Malchut descended 
from Eynaim to Peh, and YESHSUT merged with AVI into one degree, which 
led to the descent of Ohr Hochma to YESHSUT, for Ohr Hassadim of Avraham’s 
properties was already present in ZA. 

Ohr Hochma then clothed in Ohr Hassadim, MI (GE) joined ELEH ( AHP ), 
the Creator’s name ELO-IM was completed, and Hochma filled ZA. Then Malchut 
descended from Eynaim to Peh in ZA, and ZA received new AHP from Bina, 
thereby entering Gadlut and passing the Light through his Yesod into Malchut, 
called the “lower world.” As a result, Malchut begets the souls of the righteous. 

47. When Yesod of ZA joins the word BARAH (Malchut), there occurs a 
concealed and supernal division of the Creator’s name and greatness, called 
MI, and ELEH comes into being. Also, the sacred name ALA comes from 
BARAH. The sacred concealed ELEH exists just like Yesod. Yet, when Yesod 
attains its complete state, the P artzuf attains its complete state, the letter Hey 
corresponds to Yesod and the letter Yod—to ELEH. 

Here, The Zohar clarifies which Light is present in ZA, depending on his 
states. In the Sefira Yesod of Partzuf ZA there is an end, meaning a place of 
contact with Malchut, the place of the covenant between the Creator (ZA) and 
the Shechina (the souls of the righteous), also called “Israel” or Malchut. This 
place of contact is called Ateret Yesod (encirclement of Yesod) or Keter de ZA (the 
crown of ZA). 

The word BARAH signifies Katnut (small state), which comes as a result 
of Malchut’s ascent to NE. AVI never abandon the properties of GAR de Bina 
(properties of mercy); they do not desire to receive. Having ascended and 
standing in them, Malchut is called Man’ula (lock), which prevents the Light from 
spreading below her. Ateret Yesod de ZA is called Miftacha (key), for it is through 
its property that the Light can be received in the Partzufim located below AVI. 

This is possible on condition that ELEH = AHP ascend to MI = GE. Ohr 
Hochma can be received in the Kelim ELEH that wish to receive it, but only upon 
their ascension above Parsa. However, until the properties of Malchut acquire 
the property of Bina, until they are “softened” by this property, there is no way 
to receive the Light, and Malchut is called “the 50 th gate.” 

Hence, we see that the words MI BARAH ELEH signify not the question, 
“Who created these?” but the action: MI = GE BARAH (created) ELEH = AHP by 



192 


The Zohar 


the descent of Malchut from NE back to Peh. As a result, ELEH = AHP ascended 
to the Rosh and there received the Light of GAR ( Hochma ). 

Upon descending to Peh, Malchut is called MA, as that is the name of the 
lower world. Her screen in the Peh makes a Z ivug, onto which descends Ohr 
Hassadim, called “Light of blessing,” for it abolishes the prohibition and the lock 
imposed on the diffusion of Light. 

48. When the letters Hey and Yod wished to complement one another, the 
letter Mem emerged from them, and the word ELO-HIM = ELE + Hey + 
Yod + Mem was formed by the union of both sides. The word AVAR + Hey 
+ Mem = Avraham originated from ELEH. However, one might say that the 
Creator took the words ELEH and MI, joined them and formed the word 
ELOKIM, whereas the words MA and AVAR formed the word Avraham, 
where the word MI designates the fifty gates of Bina, and the word MA refers 
to the numerical value of the holy name, for HaVaYaH with the filling of the 
letter Aleph forms the Qematria of MA—45. 

Both this world and the world to come exist in these two letters, Yod and 
Hey. This world is in Yod, and the world to come is in Hey. Hence, die world to 
come was created with MI, and this world with MA. 

It is therefore written: “These are the created (B e-Hibar’am) generations 
of Heaven and earth,” where the letters Be-Hibar’am make up the word 
“Avraham,” for there was no perfection until the letters formed this word. 
Therefore, the Creator’s name HaVaYaH is first mentioned in the Torah only 
after the name Avraham. 

Ohr Hassadim in MA and Ohr Hochma in ELEH wished to complement one 
another and be complemented within one another. As a result, Ohr Hochma 
clothed in Ohr Hassadim, and Malchut receives from both Hassadim and Hochma. 
In so doing, MA and MI join and create MM, i.e., Malchut that receives Ohr 
Hochma clothed in Ohr Hassadim from Above. 



The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


49. Rabbi Chiya prostrated himself on the ground and kissed it. He wept and 
said: “Dust, how hard and heartless you are, how many you have consumed, 
all the pillars of Light and all the great souls were consumed by you. And 
the greatest of all, Rabbi Shimon, the Light of the entire world, of all the 
worlds, who illuminates and governs over the descending Light, upon which 
our world exists, is also consumed by you, and yet you govern the world?” But 
then he collected himself at once and said: “Do not be proud, dust, for the 
pillars of the world will not be betrayed to you, and Rabbi Shimon will not be 
consumed by you!” 

Malchut is the sole creation. And this sole creation is nothing but a desire 
to receive pleasure. It was made this way, and its essence cannot be changed. 
Yet, what can be changed is the intention—for which or whose sake to receive 
the pleasure. 

As a result of Malchut’s union with Bina with an altruistic will to bestow 
delight, give pleasure, Malchut acquires Bina’s desire in addition to her own. That 
is, an additional desire appears in Malchut—to bestow, opposite to her nature. 

Only this desire of Bina in Malchut can result in a Zivug and reception of 
Light. When Malchut receives all the desires that she possibly can from Bina, 
and fills them with Light, only her own initial egoistic property will remain 
uncorrected, but even that will be corrected from Above by the Creator Himself. 
The order of correction and reception of Light in Bina’s properties inside of 
Malchut is referred to as the reception on the Z ivug of Yesod, and it takes place 
sequentially along 6,000 degrees, called “6,000 years.” 

Malchut de Malchut of the world of Atzilut cannot receive any Light during the 
6,000 years until all of its parts are completely corrected. All the Zivugim (plural 
for Z ivug) throughout the 6,000 years are made not on Malchut herself, but on 
the properties she received from Bina. The place of such a Z ivug is called Yesod 


193 




194 


The Zohar 


de Malchut or Ateret Yesod. Whereas Malchut herself (egoistic desires) remains 
closed to the Light, and is therefore called the “closed gates.” 

The reception of Light during the 6,000 years, correction of the Partzufim, 
and the gradual filling of Malchut with the Light, takes place with the help of 
Bina’s desires in Malchut, which are called Miftacha (Yesod de Malchut ), for the 
impure (egoistic) force has no power over this part of Malchut. 

Yesod de Malchut means that Malchut only acts with the properties she received 
from a Higher Sefira-Yesod, which is free from the influence of the impure forces 
(Klipot). All the properties, except for those of Malchut, are altruistic, since they 
originate from Bina. However, since we wish to emphasize that a Z ivug is made 
on an altruistic desire, above the egoistic desire of Malchut, we usually say Yesod 
instead of Bina. And since Yesod is the Sefira immediately above Malchut, we say 
that a Z ivug is made not on the egoistic desires of Malchut, but on Yesod. And 
since, upon acquiring the properties of Yesod, Malchut can receive the Light, 
such reception of Light on Yesod de Malchut is called “Miftacha” (from the word 
Mafte’ach, key)—the key that opens the way for the Upper Light. 

However, since Malchut herself, that is, Malchut de Malchut (“closed gates”) 
remains inaccessible to the Light for 6,000 years, Rabbi Chiya (a particular 
spiritual degree) could not understand how Rabbi Shimon (the spiritual 
Partzuf called Rabbi Shimon) could achieve such complete perfection. Indeed, 
Rabbi Shimon is a Partzuf of such spiritual height that it receives the Light of 
Yechida. And it is impossible to receive this Light without utilizing a Z ivug on 
Malchut de Malchut itself. 

And yet, this part of Malchut remains uncorrected until the completion of 
the 6,000 years (the end of correction), and thus cannot be used. By defying 
these desires, it is as though one has already partially corrected it. And all the 
prohibitory commandments refer to Malchut de Malchut ; hence, the ban imposed 
on its use is called “a restriction.” 

Yet, if it is impossible to fill the “stony heart” (Lev HaEven), i.e., Malchut 
de Malchut (the root of egoism, the basis of creation), with Light, how can 
even a single soul achieve complete correction? After all, complete correction 
implies the reception of Light in the entire Malchut. Each soul, each part of 
Malchut that man is destined to correct contains a part of all the other parts of 
Malchut, including a part of Malchut de Malchut, which he may not work with 
until the end of correction. 

On the other hand, Rabbi Chiya sees Rabbi Shimon in a state of 
complete correction. So how could the latter have attained such state? This 



The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


195 


contradiction roused Rabbi Chiya so greatly that he prostrated himself on the 
ground and cried out. 

It is impossible to constantly “translate” the words of the Torah or The 
Zohar into a language we can understand, that “ground” signifies egoism and 
“dust” refers to the impure forces, that “crying out” implies raising MAN, and so 
forth. All the words and definitions in the text of The Zohar should be perceived 
sensuously rather than literally, as physical actions of our world. In other words, 
whatever The Zohar speaks of is related only to inner, spiritual sensations and 
experiences of one who perceives the spiritual realm. 

All the worlds constitute the “environment,” the spiritual sphere, within 
which the Creator made His only creation—man (Adam). Everything else was 
created only in order to help man to achieve his spiritual mission of becoming 
like his Creator. 

Just as in our world, the world itself and all its inhabitants, except man, are 
robots operated by their animal nature, rather than creatures with free will, in 
the spiritual worlds, all the spiritual beings, except for the soul, are operated by 
their spiritual nature. Upon being born in our world, man, too, is an animal 
without freedom to act against his egoistic desire to receive pleasure. He usually 
stays that way throughout his existence on earth, being not at all different from 
the still, vegetative, and animate levels of nature, automatically following orders 
of his inner master, egoism. 

Only with the help of Kabbalah can one gradually receive Upper, spiritual 
strength, and consequently acquire freedom of choice, that is, liberate himself from 
the influence of the impure, egoistic forces, and become free in his desires, like the 
Creator. However, such an opportunity is only given to one who can control his 
automatically-driven, egoistic nature: according to the strength of his screen, man 
ascends (moves inwardly, in his sensations) from this world to the spiritual. 

After creating the spiritual worlds as a home for his future creation, the 
Creator created the creature (soul, Adam). The soul constitutes the desire to 
delight in the sensation of the Creator, of His Light. The sensation of the 
Creator is called “Light.” There is nothing else in the entire universe besides 
the Light and the soul! 

Although the soul itself is Malchut de Malchut (the only egoistic creation), 
the Creator imparted onto it the property of altruism, having created it mixed 
with the Kelim (desires) of Bina, thereby demonstrating how wonderful it would 
be to be like Him. 

While performing altruistic actions, the soul (Adam) decided to use its 
natural egoism, Malchut de Malchut itself, to receive the Creator’s Light with 





196 


The Zohar 


altruistic intentions. Yet, when it began to let the tremendous Light of Yechida 
into Malchut de Malchut, it could not resist and wished to enjoy it egoistically. 
This change in the soul’s desires is referred to as its fall. 

As a result of the fall, Adam’s soul split into myriad parts (600,000), all of 
which fell into captivity of impure, egoistic forces (acquired egoistic desires). 
After the fall, Adam corrected some of the souls (obtained an anti-egoistic 
screen), but only partially. And then, of the total number of souls, some were 
selected for correction, lowered into this world, and clothed into bodies, 
generation after generation. 

The descent (distancing from the Creator) into our world (egoistic 
sensations of only one’s own desires) occurs as a result of attaching an additional 
“makeweight” of egoism to the soul. In the spiritual world, movement (farther 
from the Creator or closer to Him) and distance (from Him) are determined by 
the correlation of egoistic and altruistic desires within the soul. 

The purpose behind the souls’ descent to our world is to transform one’s 
egoistic desires with the help of Kabbalah, and to return to the Creator with 
one’s intentions, by performing altruistic actions. The souls’ descent continues 
until each of them and all of them together achieve complete correction. 

And the most exalted souls that refer to the degrees of Yechida and GAR 
of Haya depend on the correction of Malchut herself in Malchut of the world 
of Atzilut (“closed gates”). These will only be corrected at the completion of 
the 6,000 years, after the correction of all the rest. This is due to the inverse 
relationship between the souls and the Light that fills them: the more egoistic 
the soul is, and the lower it is located, the greater the Light that enters the 
general Partzuf (the common soul) at the time of its correction. 


THE LIGHT OF SOULS 

Yechida 

Haya 

Neshama 

Ruach 

Nefesh 

MALCHUT (types of souls) 

Keter 

Hochma 

Bina 

ZA 

Malchut 


This is why these exalted souls are consumed by dust (impure force), i.e., 
the impure force rules over them with its enormous and insolent power, for it is 
certain that no one and nothing can save these souls from captivity. 

This is why Rabbi Chiya wept: “Dust, how cruel you are!” That the most 
exalted souls are “consumed by you without any hope of escaping you!” In other 
words, the actual root of creation, the primordial egoism cannot be corrected. 

It turns out that as a result of the exalted souls’ captivity by the rule of 
the impure forces, all the righteous that bring Light to the entire world cannot 
achieve perfection themselves. Since all the souls are interconnected, not a 









The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


197 


single individual soul can arrive at the end of correction until all the souls are 
corrected. This is why they are susceptible to the ruthless rule of the dust. 

At first, Rabbi Chiya wanted to say that Rabbi Shimon himself was also 
consumed by dust, i.e., did not achieve complete correction. He had heard that 
Rabbi Yosi also reasons that the closed gates are closed for all. Yet, after some 
contemplation, he inquired: “If Rabbi Shimon revives all the worlds and governs 
them, how can it possibly be that he has not reached perfection?” 

Therefore, he concludes that Rabbi Shimon was not consumed by the 
dust, that he did achieve complete correction and is probably in a state of 
absolute perfection. The thing that Rabbi Chiya could not understand, how¬ 
ever, is how any individual soul could achieve the end of correction prior to 
(without) the complete correction of all the others. This, Rabbi Chiya could 
not explain to himself. 

50. Rabbi Chiya stood up and started to walk and weep. Rabbi Yosi joined 
him. He fasted for forty days so that he might see Rabbi Shimon. He was 
told he still was not worthy of seeing him. He wept and fasted for another 
forty days. He was then shown a vision: Rabbi Shimon and his son Rabbi 
Elazar were discussing him, Rabbi Chiya, the words he said to Rabbi Yosi, and 
thousands are listening in on their discussion. 

Although the fasting that The Zohar speaks of is a spiritual act, in our world 
such a description is a good example of how strong a desire should be in order 
to be answered from Above. Other spiritual actions include weeping, tears— 
the small state ( Katnut ) of a spiritual Partzuf, in this case referred to as “Rabbi 
Chiya.” Naturally, Rabbi Shimon and all the other characters of The Zohar are 
spiritual Partzufim, rather than people of our world. 

Truth be told, the spiritual level of a person known by a certain name in 
our world may coincide with his spiritual root described in the Torah. However, 
elucidation of this matter exceeds the scope of this particular article. It is 
nonetheless essential to note that Pharaoh in the corporeal Egypt, naturally, 
was not a spiritual Pharaoh, the way he is described in The Zohar (the Partzuf that 
includes all of Male hut), and Laban, portrayed in the Torah as a villain, is in fact 
the Supernal Spiritual Light of Partzuf AB, the Supernal Light of Hochma. This 
will be explained later on. 

The strong desire to attain the degree of Rabbi Shimon allowed Rabbi Chiya 
to see him, for he was certain that Rabbi Shimon had not been consumed by 
the dust. He came to this conclusion precisely because of his conversation with 
Rabbi Yosi, and hence passionately desired to see Rabbi Shimon. 



198 


The Zohar 


51. In that same vision, Rabbi Chiya saw several great celestial wings: how 
Rabbi Shimon and his son Rabbi Elazar mounted them and soared to the 
Assembly of Heaven, while the wings waited for them. Afterwards, they both 
returned to their place and shone brighter than ever before, brighter than the 
light of the sun. 

The Heavenly Assembly refers to the Assembly of the angel Matatron. 
However, his full name is not pronounced, and the name Matat is used instead, 
for pronouncing a name is equivalent to an action, which is not always desirable. 
The term Supernal Assembly refers to the Assembly of the Creator Himself, 
while the Heavenly Assembly refers to the Assembly of Matat. 

The wings that were waiting for Rabbi Shimon and his son Elazar are angels 
(spiritual forces, similar to robots or draft animals in our world), whose task is to 
help the souls to ascend from one spiritual degree to another. And just as these 
wings must assist the souls in their ascent, they must assist them to descend to 
their places. Therefore, it is said that the wings were waiting for Rabbi Shimon 
and his son Rabbi Elazar to bring them back down. 

And when Rabbi Chiya saw them returning from the Heavenly Assembly 
back to their place (to Rabbi Shimon’s Assembly), he noticed a new light on 
their faces, and radiance surrounded them that was brighter than the sun. 

52. Rabbi Shimon opened and said: “Let Rabbi Chiya enter and see how much 
the Creator renews the faces of the righteous in the world to come. Happy is 
he who comes here without shame. Happy is he who stands in the other world 
as a rigid pillar opposite all.” And Rabbi Chiya saw himself entering, and 
Rabbi Elazar and all the other pillars of the world that were there stood up 
before Rabbi Chiya. And he, Rabbi Chiya, was ashamed; he entered, bending, 
and sat at the feet of Rabbi Shimon. 

Rabbi Shimon opened (opened the way for the Light) and said: “Happy is he 
who enters without shame.” And all that were present there felt no shame. Only 
Rabbi Chiya was ashamed. This is because they had the strength to withstand the 
power of the dust, and Rabbi Chiya did not. They were all perfect, whereas Rabbi 
Chiya had a flaw—the desire to attain. And this is what he was ashamed of. 

53. A voice sounded: “Lower your eyes, do not raise your head, and do not 
look.” He lowered his eyes and saw Light that shone from afar. The voice 
returned and said: “The Supernal Ones, concealed and enclosed, who have 
eyes that watch over the entire world, look and see: the lower ones are sleeping, 
and the Light of their eyes is concealed in their pupils. Wake them!” 

After he followed the instruction to lower his eyes and not raise his head (not 
use his desire to receive Light, but only desires to bestow), he merited hearing 



The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


199 


(Light of Hassadim ) the appeal, with the help of which he attained everything 
he wished. The voice divides all souls into two groups: die first is a group of 
Supernal Holy Ones that are concealed, who merited their eyes to be opened to 
behold die entire world, and the second group of souls have die Light of their 
eyes concealed in their eye-sockets, which is what blinded them. This is why die 
voice called upon the souls of the first group to behold, i.e., to use the reception 
of the Upper Light, to draw the Upper Light together with the second group. 

54. Who among you turns darkness into Light and savors bitter as sweet even 
before he came here, that is, while still living in the other world? Who among 
you hopes and waits each day for the Light that shines when the Lord distances, 
when His greatness grows and He is called the King of all kings of the world? 
For he who does not wait for this each day while living in this world, has no 
place in the other world either. 

The Creator’s goal is for man to fully attain Him while still living in this 
world, to feel Him as he did prior to descending into this world, prior to 
incarnating in a physical body. From this the division of people of our world 
into two groups is clearly evident, and the voice appeals to them. 

The voice emphasizes to each group their main advantage. To the souls 
of the first group, it says that they turned darkness into Light. These are the 
souls of the world of Atzilut, for the Creator created two opposite systems in the 
worlds BYA: the system of darkness and bitterness opposite the system of Light 
and sweetness. Therefore, in the Torah of the worlds BYA there is a division into 
suitable and unsuitable, pure and impure, permitted and forbidden, holy and 
unholy, whereas the Torah of the world of Atzilut, which consists wholly of the 
Creator’s names, contains nothing impure whatsoever. 

And the sinner Laban is regarded as a holy name in the world of Atzilut, 
as well as the Pharaoh. And all the names that represent impure forces in the 
worlds BYA become corrected in the world of Atzilut, exalted and pure spiritual 
objects and forces with corresponding holy names. Therefore, the souls that 
have attained the Light of the world of Atzilut transform all darkness into Light 
and all bitterness into sweetness. In other words, the whole difference between 
the holy, pure, and good, and their opposites lies in the correction of the desire 
and in acquiring an anti-egoistic screen over the will to receive. 

And to the second group the voice said that they’re waiting for the Creator’s 
help, and He will rise ( Shechina, His manifestation to the lower ones) from the 
dust (in their sensations). But those who do not wait for Him, being preoccupied 
with other aspirations, will not rise from the dust, and the sensation of the 
Creator will remain concealed from them. 



200 


The Zohar 


55. In his vision, Rabbi Chiya saw many of his friends gathering around the 
standing pillars. And he saw them being elevated to the Heavenly Assembly, 
some are elevated, while others are lowered. And above them all, he saw Matat, 
the owner of wings, approaching. 

As the voice was calling, Rabbi Chiya saw several souls of the righteous, 
belonging to the two groups, standing around the two pillars that were already 
present in Rabbi Shimon’s assembly, and whom he had already seen ascending 
to the Heavenly Assembly. Some were ascending, and some were descending; 
moreover, this motion ensued in mutually opposite directions. 

This way the two groups help one another according to the calling voice, 
which instructs the first group to descend and the second to ascend. Rabbi Chiya 
saw also that due to the excitement of all these souls over their aspirations, i.e., 
the power of the two groups, Matat descended from the Heavenly Assembly to 
the assembly of Rabbi Shimon and swore an oath. 

56. The angel Matat swore that he heard from behind the curtain how each 
day the Creator remembers and grieves over Malchut, cast into the dust. And 
when He remembers her, He strikes 390 firmaments, and they all tremble 
with terrible fear before Him. And the Creator sheds tears for the Shechina 
(Divinity), Malchut that has fallen to the dust. And those tears simmer like 
fire, and fall into the Great Sea. And by the power of these tears, the Ruler of 
the Sea, called Rachav, is revived, blesses the Creator’s holy name, and vows to 
swallow up everything, from the first days of creation, and to absorb all within 
himself, when all the nations gather against the holy nation, and the waters 
will dry, and Israel will walk through dry land. 

This vow signifies that the Creator never forgets, but remembers each day that 
the Shechina lies in the dust. However, this does not refer to the entire Holy Shechina: 
this, the Creator need not vow, for it is revealed and seen by all who dwell in the 
Upper Worlds that everything He does is for the Shechina (Malchut ) alone. 

But this refers only to Malchut de Malchut. She is the one Rabbi Chiya thinks 
about being held captive by the impure forces, completely abandoned. Hence, 
he wept: “Oh dust that consumes all!” And here, the angel Matat, who has come 
to the Assembly of Rabbi Shimon, revealed to Rabbi Chiya a great secret—that 
the Creator’s rule is absolute, and He remembers Malchut de Malchut each day. 

A Z ivug (union of the Masacf-screen and the Light-pleasure) is defined as 
a stroke of Light onto the screen, a result of the desire to enter and cross the 
screen’s barrier, while the screen restricts and repels it. This act of repelling is 
called the Returning (reversed) Light, as it rises from the screen from below 
upwards and clothes the coming Light. 



The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


201 


This may be compared to the example of the host (Creator) offering delicious 
food (Light) to his guest ( Kli ), who wishes to enjoy the delicacies. However, as 
a result of the shame from being the receiver, the guest refuses to receive, and 
the screen repels the food (Light). It is as though the guest (Kli) says to the host 
(Creator) that he refuses to receive the pleasure (Light) for himself, for his own 
enjoyment. This repelling of the food (Light) forms the Returning Light, for it 
stems not just from not wanting to feel shame, as it is in our world, but from the 
spiritual Kli’s desire to be like the Creator. 

The Returning Light is that altruistic intention, desire. This is also the 
spiritual Kli, and only within it can the Light be received; only in this intention 
can one feel the Creator. 

After the Kli was able to repel all the pleasure coming to it, and demonstrated 
that it could meet the condition of the first restriction (to refrain from egoistic 
reception), it began to calculate how much Light it could receive for the Creator’s 
sake. The Kli receives only the amount of pleasure that it is certain it can receive 
for the Creator’s sake. 

The delight that was received inside the Kli is referred to as the Inner Light. 
The amount of Light received inside the vessel determines the degree of similarity 
to the Creator; the Kli acts like the Creator: just as He desires to bestow pleasure 
upon the Kli, so the Kli wishes to bestow upon Him, to the extent of the Inner 
Light received. Therefore, the size of the Kli, (from Peh to Tabur, where it receives 
the Light) determines the degree of merging with the Creator. In this place, the 
Kli is merged with Him in properties and intentions. 

If the Kli’s powers of resistance are not sufficient to receive for the Creator’s 
sake, and it can only refrain from reception, the Kli is considered to be in the 
“small” state, Katnut. The Kli that was created by the Creator is the strongest. 
However, afterwards, as it begins to descend, its screen gradually weakens until 
the Kli can no longer receive for the Creator’s sake. It is left with just enough 
strength to not receive for itself. This is why from this state onward there is a ban 
on reception of Light into the Kli’s desires “to receive.” The Kli may only use its 
GE, but not its AHP. And the boundary beyond which the Light cannot spread 
is called Parsa, the firmament. This barrier is built from Above; thus, even if the 
Kli suddenly wishes to receive the Light for itself, it will not be able to do so. 

The screen divides the firmament and consists of four parts: Hochma, Bina, 
Tifferet, and Malchut (HBTM), the four letters of HaVaYaH. Because Malchut 
joined with Bina and thereby corrected her egoistic properties into altruistic 
ones, the screen is located not in Malchut, but in Bina. Bina is counted as 
hundreds; therefore, the four parts HBTM equal 400. However, there is no Zivug 



202 


The Zohar 


(reception of Light) on Malchut de Malchut itself (after all, it is called the “closed 
gates”). This means that Malchut contains ninety Sefirot, and not 100: 9 Sefirot, 
each consisting of ten. 

Therefore, the screen that is called “the firmament” and that makes a Zivug 
with the Upper Light by reflecting it consists of390 parts, for the part of Malchut de 
Malchut is lacking. The firmament is therefore said to consist of 390 firmaments, 
and on it a daily Zivug with the Shechina is made, whereas a Zivug on the dust, 
which signifies the ten parts of Malchut de Malchut, is forbidden. The impact 
between the screen and the incoming Light resembles shuddering from fear to 
receive the Light inside of oneself, beyond the limits of one’s restrictions. 

There are five Sefirot in the Rosh (head) of a Partzuf: 


Keter 

- Gaigalta (or Metzach) 

- forehead 

Hochma 

- Eynaim 

- eyes 

Bina 

- Awznayim 

- ears 

ZA 

- Hotem 

- nose 

Malchut 

- Peh 

- mouth 


Just as the secretion from one’s physiological eyes is called tears, the secretion 
of the Light of Hochma from the part of the spiritual Kli called “eyes” is referred 
to as “tears.” Tears constitute the part of the Light that is rejected by the Partzuf 
due to the absence of a screen on Malchut de Malchut. All the Light that comes to 
a Partzuf wishes to enter and fill it with its pleasure, even the part of the Partzuf 
that has no screen to receive with altruistic intentions. Therefore, the screen 
immediately repels this portion of the Light. 

But between the strike of the Light from Above and the resistance of the 
screen from below, tiny drops of Light seep through the screen, which, due to its 
hurry, is unable to repel them. These drops have nothing to do with the level of 
Hochma of the Partzuf, as they lack the clothing of the Returning Light. They exit 
the Partzuf Hochma and receive the name “tears.” But it is nonetheless Light! 

This is similar to a state where we are filled with tears of compassion for 
another person. Indeed, all that exists in our world exists because it derives 
from its spiritual prototype, and all that transpires in this world, transpires only 
because it stems from its Upper, spiritual root. 

After all, the fact that the Upper Light strikes the screen, trying to break 
through its restriction, stems from its origin in the Highest Place, the Creator 
Himself, and is unrelated to the creature’s desire to receive this Light within 


The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


203 


the bounds of its altruistic capabilities. The Light stems from the world of 
Infinity, from the Creator Himself, long before the Kli appeared and wished 
to restrict itself. 

The Upper Light wishes to fill the desire to enjoy that it created, as it is said, 
“the Creator wishes to dwell in His creatures below.” The Light and the Creator 
are one and the same; after all, man defines the sensation of the Creator as 
spiritual Light. And this Upper Light strives to force its way through the screen 
and enter man’s desires, but the screen hurls it back. Thus, this repelled Upper 
Light becomes Returning Light, which designates man’s altruistic intentions to 
bestow delight upon the Creator. 

As a result of the collision with the screen, portions of the Light fall 
outside, for these tears originate from the Creator’s love and compassion for 
His creation. In our world, this spiritual action results in an emission of tears 
in an individual overwhelmed with suffering and love. However, spiritual tears 
do not disappear. 

This is described in Song of Songs (8:6): “For love is as strong as death, 
jealousy is as cruel as hell; the flashes thereof are flashes of fire, the very flame 
of the Lord!” This is because these tears stem from the Upper One’s love and 
compassion for the lower one. And just as flaming tears shed by someone in our 
world burn, so do the boiling and burning Upper tears burn like fire, like the 
very flame of the Lord! 

Being related to the property of Hochma, Malchut is called “sea.” It is 
therefore said that the tears (Light of Hochma without first being clothed in 
Light of Hassadim) fall into the sea, Malchut. And it is written that the many 
sea waters will not extinguish the Creator’s love for His creatures, expressed 
in these tears. 

It was said during the creation of the world: “Let the waters be gathered 
together unto one place” (Beresheet, 1:9). But the angel that governed the sea did 
not wish to swallow these waters, and was hence killed (was emptied of Light). 
Now, as the tears fall, he is revived. 

The reason for this is that during the creation of the world, Malchut de 
Malchut itself had not undergone any kind of correction, as the Creator created 
the worlds ABYA in a special correction, called MAN de Bina or Ateret Yesod, 
and not MAN de Malchut or Malchut de Malchut. In other words, correction is 
possible only if man corrects not Malchut de Malchut itself (his essence), but, 
while completely refraining from its use (use of egoism), he acquires higher, 
altruistic desires from Bina and receives the Creator’s Light in them (in Sefirot 
KHB-ZA de Malchut, in 390 Sefirot). 



204 


The Zohar 


These higher, altruistic desires are referred to as desires of Bina or as MAN 
de Bina, and the reception of Light in them (Z ivug) is made not on egoism 
(Malchut herself), but on the will to bestow, called Ateret Yesod. This Z ivug is 
therefore sufficient to fill only the first nine Sefirot in Malchut, but does not 
fill Malchut herself. 

Prophet Yeshayahu (Isaiah) writes in this regard: “Who are you with, 
partners? I started the worlds, and you are to complete them!” The correction of 
Malchut de Malchut is incumbent solely upon the creatures. Hence, when the sea 
ruler was told: “Let the waters be gathered together unto one place,” he objected 
and did not wish to swallow up the created waters, for due to the uncorrected 
state of Malchut de Malchut, the impure forces prevailed and ruled over him. 
And that is why he was killed. 

However, these tears correct Malchut de Malchut, and thus revive the sea 
ruler so that he would rise from the dead, sanctify the name of the Lord, fulfill 
the Creator’s will, and swallow up the primeval waters. For then, all the impure 
forces, all the evil in the world will disappear and all (desires) will gather in one 
place (property), whose name is Atzilut. This is because the world of Atzilut will 
spread from the end of the world of AK down to our world, and there will come 
the end of correction, for the worlds of BYA will return in their properties to 
the world of Atzilut. 

In the future, at the end of correction, after the correction of the first nine 
Sefirot of Malchut, when only Malchut de Malchut, the last, tenth Sefira, remains 
to be corrected, when all the nations of the world ( Malchut de Malchut) unite to 
destroy Israel (the first nine Sefirot of Malchut, the desire to correct all the ten 
Sefirot of Malchut ), the act of the sea ruler will be revealed in that he will swallow 
up all the primeval, evil waters, and the waters (severe restrictions) will dry up, and 
the sons of Israel (those who aspire for the Creator) will walk through dry land. 

The prophet Micha (Micah) says of this: “As we fled the land of Egypt, we 
saw wonders.” However, this was only the beginning, for it was only in the End 
Sea (the Red Sea; the Hebrew name signifies the end of Malchut, or Malchut de 
Malchut ), and only for a limited time. But, at the end of correction, death will 
disappear forever. 

This is how Matat explained his oath: the Creator never forgets Malchut, 
which is cast in the dust. For even though a daily Z ivug with the Shechina is made 
on only 390 firmaments, on the nine Sefirot of Malchut and not on Malchut de 
Malchut itself, which remains lying in the dust, and, as it seems to us, completely 
forgotten by the Creator, nothing could be further from the truth. In truth, 
He corrects it with each Z ivug, because with each Z ivug, as a result of the 390 



The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


205 


firmaments being struck, the tears fall outside. And these tears are not lost, but 
fall into the Great Sea ( Malchut de Malchut), which receives from them slow, yet 
gradual corrections, even if it is the Light of Hochma without the clothing of 
the Light of Hassadim. As it becomes more and more corrected, the sea ruler is 
revived until the tears accumulate to the necessary amount for the correction of 
the entire Malchut, so that all of her intentions would be for the Creator’s sake. 

This will occur when all the nations of the world unite to attack Israel. Then, 
the sea ruler will rise back to life and swallow up all the primeval waters, for 
Malchut de Malchut will receive the lacking correction, for each day the Creator 
cares for her until she, His only creation, reaches her final correction. 

And here Rabbi Chiya’s delusion was revealed to him: he understood that 
nothing disappears in the dust, but, on the contrary, each day Malchut undergoes 
corrections, just as Matat swore. 

57. Through all this, he heard a voice: “Clear this place, clear this place! The 
M ashiach (Messiah), the King-Redeemer is coming to the assembly of Rabbi 
Shimon,” for all the righteous gathered there are the heads of groups and 
assemblies, whereas all of the assembly members ascend from this assembly 
to the Assembly of Heaven. And the M ashiach visits all these assemblies and 
seals the Torah that stems from the mouths of the righteous. And at that 
moment, the M ashiach comes to the assembly of Rabbi Shimon, surrounded 
by the heads of all the Supernal assemblies. 

As a result of the great revelation—the end of correction—concealed in the 
oath of Matat, all of the righteous present at Rabbi Shimon’s Assembly were 
elevated, especially the two groups of the righteous that caused Matat to appear 
and take his oath. As a result, all of them attained Upper Degrees and reached 
the levels of “heads of assemblies,” for each assembly has members and a head, 
and the difference between them is similar to the difference between VAK, GE 
of the degree or Partzuf, from GAR, the complete Partzuf. 

Hence, it is written that the place should be cleared for the M ashiach. After 
all, when Matat revealed the secret of the end (of correction), and specifically 
how creation will be delivered from egoism, a voice appeared and commanded 
to prepare a place for the M ashiach, the King-Redeemer, for the end of correction 
is connected to the King-Mas hiach. 

However, only the righteous of Rabbi Shimon’s assembly, who are above all 
the heads of assemblies, merit his coming, for only those who are on the same 
spiritual level as the King-Mashiach (all those who have already corrected all of 
their other properties—the first nine Sefirot in their part of desires-Malchut—all 



206 


The Zohar 


of the properties except for the original egoism, Malchut de Malchut) can merit 
the revelation of his face. 

The level of the M ashiach is the Light of Yechida. And if all the members had 
not reached the level of the heads of the assemblies, the GAR of the degrees, 
i.e., corrected all that they could, they would not have merited the revelation 
of the M ashiach’s face. But the heads of the Assemblies are not GAR of the low 
degrees. Rather, they represent a level so high that all the members have merited 
reaching the Heavenly Assembly of Matat. 

And now all the members merited becoming the heads of the Assemblies, 
wherefrom they merited an ascent to the Heavenly Assembly. Moreover, 
thanks to their corrections, they merited the M ashiach himself coming to all 
these assemblies to be adorned with their deeds in the Torah. And now all the 
members have merited reaching the level of the assemblies’ heads. This is why 
the M ashiach is adorned with the Torah of the assemblies’ heads. Thus, thanks 
to them, the M ashiach himself ascends to a Higher Degree. 

58. At that time, all the members stood up. Rabbi Shimon stood up, too, and 
his Light rose to the firmament. The M ashiach said unto him: “Happy are 
you, Rabbi, for your Torah has risen in 370 beams of Light, and each beam 
divides into 613 beams (properties) that ascend and bathe in the rivers of 
the holy A pharsemon (persimmon). And the Creator confirms and signs the 
Torah of your assembly, of the assembly of Chizkiyah (Hezekiah), the King of 
Judah, and the assembly of Achiyah ha Shiloni (Ahijah the Shilonite).” 

When the M ashiach revealed himself to them and came to Rabbi Shimon’s 
Assembly, all the members stood up (ascended from the level of VAK to GAR), 
and Rabbi Shimon stood on the same degree as the M ashiach. And the Light rose 
to the height of the firmament. This indicates that Rabbi Shimon has attained 
the Light of the ten firmaments, the previously missing tenth firmament on 
account of the closed gates of Malchut de Malchut, and has attained the Light of 
Yechida, which he now was able to receive, as he could make a Z ivug on Malchut de 
Malchut. And the Light of Yechida that shines from this Z ivug is called M ashiach. 
The “sitting” level is 390, or VAK; the “standing” level is 400, or GAR. 

The M ashiach said to Rabbi Shimon that his Torah gave rise to the Light of 
Yechida in Partzuf Atik, because: 

Units (0 - 9) are in Malchut; 

Tens (10 - 90) are in ZA; 

Hundreds (100 - 900) are in Ima; 

Thousands (1,000 - 9,000) are in Aba; 



The Vision of Rabbi Chiya 


207 


Tens of thousands (10,000 - 90,000) are in Arich Anpin-, 

And hundreds of thousands (100,000 - 900,000) are in At ik. 

Since each Sefira of Atik equals 100,000, the four Sefirot of HaVaYaH (HBTM 
of Atik) total 400,000. 

However, in this case, he should have said that the Torah performed the 
deed in 400,000; yet, he said that the Light emanated by Ima is not used on 
400, but only on 370, for although the Torah had reached the zenith of the 
firmament, it still could not reach GAR of the last, Supernal Hundred. Hence, 
there are only 370, while the Upper Thirty are absent in Ima. 

The same applies with regard to thousands—the Light of Aba does not use 
GAR of each thousand, but only VAK, i.e., 600 instead of 1,000. Instead of the 
GAR of each thousand, it uses thirteen ( Hochma of the “thirty-two Netivot (paths 
of) Hochma”). The number thirteen signifies Hochma of the “thirty-two Netivot 
Hochma,” the weak Light of Hochma, called the holy Apharsemon. 

It is therefore said that the Torah attained 37 0 Lights, and each of them divides 
into 613 beams; thus, in the 400 of Ima, thirty of the Upper Light of Hochma are 
absent, which leaves it with only 370. And each thousand lacks the Upper 400 
(GAR of Hochma). Instead of using the thirteen paths of the holy Apharsemon, each 
thousand contains no more than 613, for all the supernal secrets are concealed in 
Rabbi Shimon’s assembly. And the Creator Himself sealed them, for He ascends 
and becomes adorned with the achievements of all the righteous in the Torah. 

We know from the Talmud ( Sanhedrin, 99:1) that everything the prophets 
ever said refers only to the days of the Mashiach’s coming, but in the future 
(Yeshayahu, 64), everyone will behold the Creator themselves. For all the degrees 
and levels that refer to the days of the M ashiach will then be corrected, and all 
the secrets of the Torah will be revealed, everyone will attain complete revelation 
of the Light, of the Creator, as it is said, everyone will see with their own eyes 
(sight implies GAR de Hochma). 

From the aforesaid, it becomes clear that there exists an opportunity to 
correct one’s individual Malchut de Malchut even before all the souls achieve it in 
the future. In such a case, man reaches his individual level of attainment of 400, 
although his general level cannot be higher than 370, as in the case of everybody 
else. This is the degree that Rabbi Shimon, Rabbi Chizkiyah, and Achiyah ha 
Shiloni had reached. 

59. The M ashiach said: “I have come here not to confirm the Torah of your 
assembly, but only because the ‘owner of wings’ is on his way here. For I know 
that he shall not enter any other assembly, but only yours.” Meanwhile, Rabbi 



208 


The Zohar 


Shimon told him of the oath taken by the “owner of wings.” Right then 
the M ashiach trembled in awe and raised his voice, and the Heavens shook, 
and the Great Sea boiled, and the Leviathan stirred, and the entire world 
threatened to overturn. 

At that moment, he saw Rabbi Chiya in Rabbi Shimon’s adornments. 
He asked, “Who gave man in this world the adornments, garment of 
the other world?” (garment of the other world onto the body of this world). Rabbi 
Shimon answered, “This is Rabbi Chiya, the cresset of the Torah!” He said 
to him, “Gather him and his sons (those who have left this world), and they 
shall join your Assembly.” Rabbi Shimon said, “Time was granted to him, 
he was granted time” (Rabbi Chiya’s time has not yet come). 

The M ashiach said to Rabbi Shimon that he came not for the sake of the 
Torah, but because the “owner of wings” has come to the assembly, wishing to 
know what Matat had said. For Matat had revealed that the end of correction 
would be preceded by terrible suffering for Israel—the Heavens and the Great Sea 
would tremble, and the world would be on the verge of collapse, as predicted in 
the Talmud ( Sanhedrin , 97): “All is broken.” Hence, he raised his voice, wishing 
to mitigate all this upheaval. 

The M ashiach was surprised to see Rabbi Chiya’s garment (that Rabbi Chiya 
exists in a physical body of our world, in the property of this world), for if he 
had merited the appearance of Matat and his oath, he had attained the degree 
of complete correction of all his evil. And since he merited seeing the Mashiach’s 
face, to receive the Light of Yechida, he had obviously completed his work in this 
world, and there is nothing left for him to do here. Hence, he should leave it 
and enter Rabbi Shimon’s assembly in the Garden of Eden. 

But Rabbi Shimon persuaded Rabbi Chiya that he needs to continue 
performing new, additional corrections in this world. And both the M ashiach 
and Rabbi Shimon explained to Rabbi Chiya what else specifically he still 
needed to do in this world. 

60. Rabbi Chiya trembled in awe when the M ashiach left, and his eyes fulfilled 
with tears. For the M ashiach left Rabbi Shimon’s Assembly weeping from the 
great desire for the final correction and redemption. And Rabbi Chiya was also 
anguished from the fervent desire to reach the end of correction. Rabbi Chiya 
cried and said: “Happy is the lot of the righteous in the other world, and happy 
is the lot of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, who has merited all of this.” 



Who Is Your Partner? 


61. Beresheet: Rabbi Shimon opened: “Put my words in your mouth. How 
much effort should man exert in the Torah day and night, for the Creator is 
attentive to those who study it. And with every word that man attains by his 
efforts in the Torah, he builds a firmament.” 

The Creator gave the righteous the power of His speech. And just as the 
Creator creates the creature by the power of His word, so the righteous create 
new Heavens by its power. This is why Rabbi Shimon opened his speech by 
explaining the words, “In the beginning, the Creator created Heaven and 
earth,” as the word Barah (created) also means “closing” and “limiting.” And 
we must understand why the Creator had created it in such a closed form. 
He answers, “To put the correction of Heaven and earth in the words of 
the righteous, to make them His partners—participants in the creation of 
Heaven and earth.” 

There are two kinds of renewal of Heaven and earth that the Creator 
enclosed in the mouths of the righteous: 

1. The correction of Adam’s sin, the correction of the past. Even before 
the creation of Adam, the Creator had made a secret correction of Heaven and 
earth, as it is described in the beginning of the Torah, in the chapter Beresheet: 
ZON de Atzilut ascended to AVI and to AA, while Adam ascended to ZON 
and YESHSUT. As a result, Adam received the Light of NRN de Atzilut, for he 
clothed YESHSUT and ZON de Atzilut, i.e., ascended to their level. 

Adam is located within the worlds BYA and he ascends together with these 
worlds. All the worlds can ascend above their permanent state or descend to 
their places with Adam inside of them. Adam’s spiritual level and the Light that 
he receives are determined by his location (see page 212). 


209 



210 


The Zohar 


DURING ASCENT PERMANENT STATE 

Atik 

AVI AA 

ZON AVI 

Adam - Beria YESHSUT + ZON 

- Parsa of the world of Atzilut- 

Adam - Yetzira Beria 

Adam - Assiya Yetzira 

Assiya 

In other sources, such as the Talmud ( Bava Batra, 58:2), this is described 
as Adam’s ascent to the level of the sun (ZA de Atzilut). This Light is called 
“Zihara llaa” (Zihara is the Aramaic word for Zohar in Hebrew or “radiant 
Light” in English). 

As a result of his sin, Adam fell spiritually to the level of our corporeal world 
(Talmud, Hagigah, 12:1). And instead of NRN de Atzilut that he used to receive 
before his fall, he now receives the Light from the worlds BYA that are below 
Parsa. And as a result of Adam’s sin, Heaven (ZA) and earth (Malchut) of the 
world of Atzilut descended to the level of VAK de ZA and the point of Malchut 
respectively, as they descended below Tabur de PartzufAA. 

And the righteous that live in this world, but already exist spiritually in 
the spiritual worlds of BYA, are entrusted with the task of correcting all that 
transpired through Adam’s fault, and to return, to renew the Heavens and the 
earth ( ZON de Atzilut ) and elevate them to AVI and AA—ZA to AA and Malchut 
to AVI, as it was before the sin. And as a result of their work, the righteous will 
receive the Light of the world of Atzilut that the corrected Adam is entitled to, 
for they (their souls, spiritual Kelim or inner spiritual Partzuj) are his parts. 

2. However, even before the sin, Adam was not in the perfect state for which 
the Creator had created him. Hence, after the righteous correct the consequences 
of Adam’s sin and attain NRN de Atzilut, which existed in Adam before the sin, 
new work awaits them—to receive new Upper Light that has yet to descend. In 
other words, if the first goal is to correct the sin, the second is to attain even 
more. It is called to “create new Heaven and earth,” new properties of ZON, in 
which new, Higher Light can be received. 

This new level or degree that has never been present in any Kli is described 
as “neither hath an eye seen the Creator beside thee,” and the degrees which 




Who Is Your Partner? 


211 


the righteous attach to the worlds are called “new Heaven” and “new earth,” for 
they are truly new and have never before existed in reality. 

And this Heaven and earth, which the righteous correct to the level that 
preceded Adam’s sin, during the creation (Beresheet), are not called new, as they’ve 
already existed and die Creator Himself corrected diem even before Adam’s sin. 
Hence, they are called renewed, and the righteous who correct them are not 
called the Creator’s partners. 

“Encloses in their mouths” implies reception of such Upper Light that was 
neither received by Adam nor emanated from the Creator. And now, by the 
actions of the righteous, which are called partners, participants and co-creators, 
it conies out and shines in creation. Thus we see that all the righteous are 
divided into two groups: those who correct Adam’s sin and those who create 
new degrees of attainment. The latter are called the Creator’s partners. 

ZA is called voice and Malchut is called speech. When a righteous person 
studies the Torah and thereby raises MAN (by the voice and speech of his Torah) 
from his soul to ZON, his voice ascends to ZA and his speech ascends to Malchut. 
The voice of the Torah that ascends with MAN to ZA is called the Creator 
(Kadosh Baruch Hu). 

Also, each renewed word in the Torah builds a new firmament. A word 
means speech, and any speech that renews the Torah by those who study it 
ascends in the form of MAN to Malchut, who is called “word and speech.” This 
creates a new firmament in the form of a screen, on which a Z ivug between the 
Creator and the Shechina is made. This is what the righteous, who study the 
Torah, attain by raising MAN! 

However, renewal in the words of the Torah does not imply anything new 
in the voice of the Torah. For Malchut has to recreate herself for each new Z ivug, 
for after each Z ivug, Malchut returns to the state of virginity thanks to the MAN 
raised by the righteous, who constantly renew her properties, her Yesod— the 
Kli for the reception of Light from ZA. Hence, it is written that the Torah is 
renewed by each word, for a word ( Malchut ) is renewed by the speech of the 
righteous in the Torah, as, after each Z ivug, the previous Kli disappears and a 
new one appears. 

62. We have learned that just as the Torah is renewed by one’s mouth, that 
renewal ascends and appears before the Creator. And the Creator accepts this 
wisdom, kisses it, and adorns it with seventy adornments. And the renewed 
wisdom itself ascends and settles on the head of the righteous that revive the 



212 


The Zohar 


worlds, and then flies, soaring through 70,000 worlds, until it ascends to Atik, 
the Sefira Keter. And all that exists in Atik is concealed, Supernal wisdom. 

When a person raises MAN from his Torah, this word, which is Nukva de 
ZA, ascends and connects to the Creator in a Zivug with Him. The Creator takes 
this word, kisses, and adorns it, and these are the two types of Zivugim (plural 
for Z ivug) in ZON: 

1. Zivug de Neshikin (kisses); 

2. Z ivug de Yesodot (bases/foundations). 

Each Z ivug consists of two Zivugim, for a Z ivug on Ohr Hochma must clothe 
itself into the Partzuf (garment) of Ohr Hassadim. Therefore, a preliminary Z ivug 
must be made on Ohr Hassadim, whose role is to become a garment for Ohr 
Hochma. This is why each Z ivug consists of two Zivugim: 

1. Zivug on the degree of Hochma, called Z ivug de Neshikin, because it 
stands at the Peh de Rosh of the Partzuf, at the level of Rosh and GAR. 

2. Z ivug on the degree of Hassadim, called Z ivug de Yesodot, because it 
takes place at the level of the bodies of the Partzufim. 

Therefore, it is said that the Creator took Nukva in this word and kissed her, 
i.e., made a Z ivug de Neshikin at the level of GAR, and then adorned her, i.e., 
made a Z ivug de Yesodot at the level of Hassadim. As a result, Ohr Hochma clothed 
in Ohr Hassadim, and Nukva received the complete Light. 

IN SEVENTY ADORNMENTS: the complete Light of Nukva is called 
“seventy adornments,” because Malchut is the seventh day, and when she receives 
from ZA, her Sefirot become tens, just as the Sefirot of ZA; this turns Malchut into 
7 x 10 = 70. Mochin (wisdom), Ohr Hochma is called Atara (adornment or crown). 
Hence, what she receives is called “seventy adornments.” After Malchut receives 
the Light of Hassadim, with the help of the MAN of the righteous, she becomes 
fit to receive the Upper Light of Hochma, the seventy adornments. 

As was said above, there are two kinds of renewal of Heaven and earth (ZON): 

1. When everything returns to the state preceding Adam’s sin. In that 
instance, Malchut is called the “word of the Torah” (VAK), where the 
Torah is ZA. 

2. When Heaven and earth are created with a new Light, which even Adam 
did not attain prior to his sin. And this attainable word is called GAR. 

It is written (Talmud, Berachot, 7:1) that the righteous sit with adornments 
on their heads, for Malchut ascended to adorn the head of the righteous (ZA) 



Who Is Your Partner? 


213 


in his Yesod, called Chai Olamim (reviver of worlds), or, rather, in his Ateret 
Yesod-the place of circumcision. And this transpires thanks to the MAN raised 
by the righteous that have already attained the Upper Light of Adam’s Zihara 
Ilaa, just as Rabbi Shimon and his friends have already attained it. 

Ohr Hochma is called O hr Haya. Since ZA desires only Hassadim, he can 
receive O hr Haya only with the help of his Nukva, Malchut. It turns out that 
ZA lives, i.e., receives Ohr Haya, only if he is in a Zivug with Nukva, called O lam 
(world). That is how the name Chai Olamim (reviver of worlds) originated. 

Also, Nukva, the adornment on his head, becomes important (Keter - crown) 
because ZA receives this Light only thanks to his Malchut. Although Malchut was 
born from ZA, since it is Malchut and no other that evokes, makes reception of 
the Light of Life possible, ZA calls her his mother. Indeed, ZA receives Ohr Haya 
(the Light of Life) from her. 

Therefore, it is written that Malchut flies and soars in 70,000 worlds, and 
after her Zivug with ZA on his Atara (adornment on his head), she ascends even 
higher, to AA, where the seven Sefirot of Malchut, called 70,000 worlds, become 
corrected, as one Sefira of ZA equals 10,000. After that, Malchut ascends higher 
still—to At ik. And all of these ascents of ZON to At ik transpire thanks to the 
efforts made by the righteous that raise MAN: a Zivug on Atara elevates ZON to 
AVI, from which they ascend to AA (70,000 worlds), and from there to At ik, the 
highest possible point of ascent. 

It is therefore written that all the words of Atik’s Supernal wisdom are locked, 
since Malchut receives the Upper Light upon ascending to At ik, and each degree 
that she receives from Atik is called “concealed,” “Supernal wisdom,” i.e., GAR 
de Hochma. This is because words of wisdom signify the degree of Hochma, and 
the words “concealed,” “secret,” and “Supernal” refer to GAR. Also, they are 
revealed only to those who attain the level of At ik, but not below, as Tzimtzum 
Bet (the second restriction) already exists in AA. 

63. And when this hidden wisdom, which is renewed here in this world, 
ascends, she joins Atik, ascends and descends, enters 18 worlds, where no 
eye has seen the Creator besides you. They emerge from there and appear 
before Atik, complete and perfect. Meanwhile, Atik tests her and finds her 
most desirable above all else. He then takes her and adorns her with 370,000 
adornments. And she, the renewed Torah, ascends and descends, and is 
transformed into a firmament. 

During the ascent of Malchut to Atik, she joins the Zivug that transpires 
there, and creates Ohr Hozer (Returning Light) by accepting Ohr Yashar (Direct 



214 


The Zohar 


Light) at the level of Atik’s properties. The ascent of Malchut means that Malchut 
elevates Ohr Hozer from herself upwards. Malchut’s descent means that she sends 
O hr Yashar from Above downwards. And then Malchut receives the hidden, 
secret, and Supernal wisdom. The word “joins” signifies her contact with the 
Ohr Hozer and the Ohr Yashar within Atik itself. 

This Z ivug is made in Atik on its Yesod, but not on Malchut, since Malchut de 
Atik is concealed until the end of correction. Like Yesod de ZA during its ascent 
to AVI, this Yesod is called Chai Olamim. The difference between them is that 
Yesod de Atik is called “No one else but you can see the Creator,” for a Z ivug on 
Yesod elevates Ohr Hozer and clothes Ohr Yashar with it. This screen is defined 
in AVI, below Atik, as wings that block the Upper Light. This shows that the 
screen possesses a force of restriction, law, judgment. This is why Ohr Hozer is 
also called “the Light of Restriction.” Thus, Ohr Hozer exists in AVI. 

Conversely, the screen in Yesod de Atik, of which it is said that there “the 
Creator no longer hides from you” ( Yeshayahu, 30:20), while it does raise Ohr 
Hozer, it does not conceal the Creator thereby, does not have the properties of 
wings. This is the reason why it is called Chai Olamim (reviver of worlds). 

Nevertheless, it remains concealed until man attains that level himself, as is 
written: “Only your eyes shall see the Creator.” There are no wings or anything 
else there that conceal Him from outsiders’ eyes, for no restrictions are imposed 
and everything is revealed. And neither are there any restrictions in Ohr Hozer, 
but only mercy and benevolence, as in Ohr Yashar. 

The name Chai Olamim implies that a Z ivug is made not on ten Sefirot of 
Ohr Yashar from Above downwards and ten Sefirot of Ohr Hozer from below 
upwards, and not on the whole of the twenty Sefirot, i.e., not on Malchut herself, 
but on Yesod de Malchut. In this instance, there are nine Sefirot of Ohr Yashar 
and nine Sefirot of Ohr Hozer, as Yesod is the ninth Sefira: 9 + 9= 18= 10 + 8 = 
Yod + Chet, which is pronounced in reverse order as Chet-Yod (Chai), for this is 
the Returning Light. The word “life” (Chaim) is derived from the word “alive” 
(Chai), for he who is able to make a Z ivug on Yesod receives the Upper Light of 
life, Ohr Hochma. 

Tremendous Upper Light manifests in Atik as a result of this Z ivug. This 
is because all the worlds and all that inhabit them join Nukva, and together 
they attain true perfection, the level for which they were initially conceived and 
created by the Creator. 

Hence, it is said that word flies in the firmament, which signifies the creation 
of Ohr Hozer from below upwards, which leads to Ohr Yashar descending from 



Who Is Your Partner? 


215 


the Creator, from Above downwards. And the clothing of Ohr Hozer on Ohr 
Yashar creates a firmament, because the screen that appears in Malchut for the 
creation of Ohr Hozer comes as a result of the good deeds of the righteous, their 
MAN (requests for spiritual ascent) aimed at pleasing the Creator. So then, after 
this screen makes a Zivug with the Upper Light, it becomes a firmament, with 
the help of which, the righteous attain the full height of the degree on which 
they have now made a Zivug. 

This occurs because when this degree descends to the righteous through the 
firmament, it clothes in Ohr Hozer (garment of this firmament), which, together 
with the Ohr Yashar clothed within it, turn over and they descend below the 
screen (firmament) and thereby become attainable by the righteous. 

Those righteous that have achieved such perfection that they can raise 
MAN to such exalted Zivug have already rid themselves of egoism completely 
and have no desire to receive anything for themselves. Instead, they raise their 
MAN (request) with the sole purpose of pleasing the Creator. Therefore, by 
their corrections (MAN), they correct the screen in Malchut, and, by creating 
Ohr Hozer in her, which ascends from the screen of Malchut upwards, make her 
capable of a great Zivug. This is because all that ascends is altruism, bestowal, 
repelling, and rejecting reception for oneself and egoistic pleasure. 

Then there is a Zivug with the Upper Light, and the Upper Light clothes 
in the ascending Returning Light. This descending Upper Light clothes into 
the Returning Light and enters into the righteous that have raised MAN. The 
expression “from below upwards” implies the repelling of Light by a person, and 
“from Above downwards” designates a person’s reception. 

And since the Upper Light comes to man through a firmament, it takes 
the Light reflected from the firmament as its garment, and one receives the 
Upper Light clothed in Returning Light. This means that, even after one already 
receives the spiritual information of the entire degree, he delights in the Upper 
Light that descends to him only to the extent in which he can please the Creator 
thereby, i.e., to the extent of his strength, the magnitude of his screen, and the 
amount of Returning Light that clothes the Direct Upper Light. 

Such reception of the Upper Light (only to the extent of the magnitude of 
Ohr Hozer created by man) is called the reception for the Creator’s sake. And 
wherever one cannot find a way to bestow upon the Creator, he does not receive. 
Hence, his reception is clothed in bestowal: the Upper Direct Light is clothed in 
Returning Light, meaning the lower one receives only the clothed Upper Light 
from the Upper One, i.e., only through the firmament. 



216 


The Zohar 


64. And thus, every deed creates firmaments that appear before A tik, and he 
calls them “new Heavens” or, rather, “renewed firmaments,” concealed by 
Supernal wisdom. And all the other parts of the Torah that are not renewed 
by means of Supernal wisdom appear before the Creator, ascend and become 
“the lands of life” (A rtzot HaChaim). They then descend and adorn one land. 
And it becomes renewed, and a new land comes into being from all that was 
renewed in the Torah. 

The righteous are constantly raising newer and newer MAN, and thus 
receive newer and newer degrees of attainments from Atik, with the help of the 
firmaments created by the Upper Zivug. From these firmaments emerge new 
Heavens, which are renewed in the degrees of Atik. These exalted attainments 
of the righteous are therefore called the hidden secrets of Supernal wisdom, for 
they descend clothed in the garments received from the firmaments. 

Malchut is called “earth” and Bina is called “the lands of life” ( Artzot 
HaChaim ). When Malchut attains all the degrees of Bina, she acquires the name 
“the land of life.” Malchut is also called the “new land,” for she exchanges her 
own properties for those of Bina. And everything that was previously Malchut 
now becomes Bina. 

Therefore, it is written that in the future, BON will become SAG, and MA 
will become AB, for Heaven is ZA that now ascended to the degree of Atik (AB 
or Hochma). The earth, Nukva de ZA, Malchut, became SAG, Bina. Hence, the 
new land and the new Heavens are Malchut and ZA that became SAG and AB, 
Atik and AA. 

65. It is written, “When the new land and the new Heavens, which I make.” 
It is not written, “I have made,” in past tense, but rather “I make,” in present 
tense, for they are constantly made from the renewal and secrets of the Torah. 
And it is written of this: “And I shall place it in your mouth, and in the 
shadow of your hands’ garments, that I may take the Heavens, and lay the 
foundations of the land” (Yeshayahu , 51:16). It is simply said “Heavens,” for 
it implies the Heavens renewed by the Torah. 

Everything that is described in the Torah is written in the present tense, 
as there is no time in the spiritual; everything is written with regard to the one 
who attains the Torah at that given moment. This is what The Zohar wants to 
stress here: the matter concerns man’s constant work on himself, on his nature. 
And the righteous that have already attained the Upper Light continue creating 
newer and newer Heavens and lands, as is written, “The righteous ascend from 
summit to summit,” and this process is infinite. 




Who Is Your Partner? 


217 


66. Rabbi Elazar said, “What is the meaning of ‘in the shadow of your hands’ 
garments?”’. He answered, when the Torah was passed to Moshe, tens of 
thousands of Supernal angels appeared so as to raise him with the flames of 
their mouths, but the Creator protected him. So now, when the renewal in 
the Torah ascends and appears before the Creator, He protects it and shelters 
the one who performed it, so as to prevent the angels from finding out and 
envying him, until new Heaven and earth are made out of this renewal in 
the Torah. Hence, it is said, “To take the Heavens and lay the foundations of 
the land from the shadow of your hands’ garments.” It follows that all that is 
concealed from the eyes achieves a supernal result. This is why it is said, “In 
the shadow of your hands’ garments.” Yet, why should it be concealed from 
the eyes for the sake of a supernal result? Hence, it is immediately said, “So 
that I may take the Heavens and lay the foundations of the land.” As we have 
learned—so that new Heavens and earth will appear out of this concealment. 

The phrase “In the shadow of your hands’ garments” alludes to Ohr Hozer, 
the garment that stems from the firmament, clothing and covering of the Ohr 
Hochma. Like a shadow, this garment conceals Hochma from outsiders’ eyes, so 
they do not know what is inside. Why are High Degrees concealed from angels? 
So they would not envy man, for when the angels, which are made of a very light 
material (without egoism), look at one who is righteous and see his negative 
properties, they envy him for the High Degree that he has achieved. They then 
begin slandering that righteous, the properties that they discover in him. This 
brings harm to the righteous. 

Therefore, when a degree clothes into the garment of a firmament (O hr 
Hozer), this garment measures the degree itself, its magnitude, to prevent man 
from receiving more than his intention for the Creator’s sake allows, i.e., only 
to the extent of Ohr Hozer. Thus, he is protected from the angels’ envy and from 
their ability to harm his spiritual condition, for he becomes equal to them in his 
properties: his Returning Light makes him equal. 

Like everything else that fills the worlds, M elachim (angels) are man’s 
inner properties and forces. In order to avoid harming himself by wishing to 
attain Higher Degrees before he has acquired Ohr Hozer, these degrees must 
be concealed. However, in addition to Ohr Hozer, one should exercise caution 
against his desire. 

This explains the rule: “The eye sees and the heart covets,” and man would 
not be able to protect his intention, to keep it for the Creator’s sake alone, and 
would desire to receive for himself. However, once clothed in the garment of 



218 


The Zohar 


the firmament, he can be certain that he will not receive above his intention to 
receive for the Creator’s sake. 

Let us briefly examine how a desire is conceived in man. One looks at 
something for the first time, not yet knowing what he is going to see. It is as 
if an object accidentally falls into his field of vision. Naturally, no ban can be 
imposed on it, as this occurrence is not dependent on man; thus, it is neither 
rewarded nor punished. 

However, when looking at it for the second time—here, man already has free¬ 
dom of choice. And if the second look is going to result in the desire to receive 
pleasure, it is forbidden. If man cannot restrain himself, and looks for the second 
time, his eyes send a signal to his heart, and the heart begins to desire. Thus, man 
has the power to decide whether or not to allow the desire to be born within him. 
This is the meaning of the phrase: “The eye sees and the heart covets.” 

67. He said to these gates and to the words that were set one upon the other in 
the renewed Torah: “Who are you with? You are my partners. Just as I make 
the Heavens and the earth with My words, as it is written, ‘By the Creator’s 
word were the Heavens made,’ so you create new Heavens and earth by your 
labor in the Torah.” 

The properties of reception are called “gates,” because, like open gates, they 
are always ready to receive. “Words” are the properties of bestowal, of raising 
MAN to the Creator. The phrase “Set one upon the other” signifies one clothing 
the other, and so occurs reception for the sake of bestowal. 

68. However, if one were to claim that the renovation of the Torah by one 
who does not even know what he is saying creates a firmament, then look 
at one who is not familiar with the secrets of the Torah: since he renews the 
Torah without having sufficient knowledge, all that he renews ascends, and 
the reverse side of man (male part of the impure force), and the false tongue 
(from Nukva of the impure force, called Tehom Raba —great abyss) comes 
toward him. This reversed man skips 500 Parsaot (measures of distance) to 
receive this renewal of the Torah, takes it and makes a false firmament out of 
it, called T ohu (abyss). 

As we already know, the righteous raise MAN to please the Creator. This 
is called the “words of the Torah,” for the words are renewed as a result of the 
Upper Zivug, and ZON receive a new Light from this Zivug, to the extent that 
they come to merit the renewal of Heaven and earth by their actions. They 
thereby become the Creator’s partners—fellow workers, for, just like Him, they 
renew Heaven and earth with their words. 



Who Is Your Partner? 


219 


Although one who is not familiar with the secrets of the Torah (the ways of 
the Creator) so as to know how to protect himself and to not harm the Higher 
Degrees tells himself that his intention is for the exalted goal, he deludes himself, 
for he does not know that which his soul surely knows—that his intentions are 
for himself. Terrible punishment awaits him, for he allows the impure forces to 
destroy those who labor in the Torah. The Zohar explains: if one does not know 
the exact meanings of the words, i.e., if he raises MAN to the great Zivug without 
a thorough understanding of all the intricate details of the act, the reverse man 
and the false tongue capture his word. 

Klipot (one’s impure forces) also consist of male and female parts. The male 
part is called “fruitless return,” and the female part is called “falsehood.” The 
male part of the Klipa is not as bad as the female part. And when it is by itself, 
it does not prompt one to lie by the Creator’s name; on the contrary, goodness 
strikes his eye, yet the eye itself is evil. And he who falls into the hands of the male 
impure force uses the Creator’s name in vain, for he detaches himself from the 
Creator and receives no Light from Him, i.e., he utters words and seemingly acts, 
but fruitlessly, for these actions are not the screen’s interaction with the Light. 

Hence, the sages said: “The Creator says of all who is proud: He and I cannot 
be together” (Talmud, Suta, 5:1), for his intentions are to receive everything for 
himself, for his own benefit, for his pride and vanity, as the sensation of one’s 
“I” is the greatest manifestation of pride. Hence, man falls under the power of 
the evil eye. Consequently, the MAN that he raises receives no response from 
Above, and he utters the Creator’s name in vain. Therefore, the male part of the 
impure force is called empty, fruitless, false, vain, unsuccessful, and futile, for 
the Creator cannot unite with him due to the dissimilarity of their properties. 

If, however, one feels not his similarity to the Creator, but rather his 
oppositeness in properties from Him, and perceives himself as the most evil of 
all, he can then lower himself before the Creator, suppress all of his properties 
out of hatred for them, and the Creator Himself will perform the remaining part 
of his correction. However, one who is proud not only fails to understand the 
extent of his remoteness from the Creator, he actually believes that he is entitled 
to receive more than others, and that the Creator owes him something. 

Nukva de Klipa is called “falsehood.” After one falls into the net of the male 
part of the impure force, the latter makes a Zivug with its Nukva (impure, bitter, 
and evil force), which, as a result of its connection to the male part, falsifies the 
Creator’s name, descends and instigates man, and then ascends, complaints 



220 


The Zohar 


against him, and takes his soul. However holy this soul was, Nukva de Klipa grabs 
all of it for itself. 

Naturally, dais refers to one who works on himself and advances spiritually, 
for whom working for die Creator’s sake is his life’s calling. Yet, he may 
occasionally fail to observe precisely all die restrictions, and thus find himself 
in such states. An ordinary person, however, who neither works on himself 
nor studies Kabbalah, is obviously entirely unrelated to either pure or impure 
spiritual forces. 

For example, the male impure force says that one must study the Torah, but 
then steals the results of his work for itself. As a result, man loses interest in his 
studies, and must once more consolidate himself in his efforts and advancement. 
And although he attains the Creator and the revelation of Light to a certain 
degree, it is nonetheless fruitless, for all of his attainments vanish from him, and 
he gains nothing from them. 

Therefore, the Torah refers to it as the “reverse man,” for initially he ate 
and drank and said “Go,” i.e., raise MAN to the Creator and receive the Light 
for the sake of the exalted goal, but not for yourself. Thus, it pretends that it 
is not the impure force, but its opposite. However, due to its property called 
“fruitless return,” it then makes a Zivug with its Nukva (the great abyss), which 
steals man’s soul and destroys him with its falsehood, and man is left without 
even the slightest part of his soul that is holy and pure! 

Hence, it is written that he skips through 500 Parsaot: initially, ZON of 
the impure forces have only VAK in ZA and a point in Malchut. Consequently, 
they can only be equal to ZON de Atzilut in their Katnut (small state), when 
they are also VAK and a point, and have neither the power nor the place to 
connect to Bina. 

Nevertheless, thanks to the MAN raised by the lower ones, the male impure 
force is given the opportunity to skip through ZAT de Bina, which sustain the pure 
and holy ZON. ZON contain Sefirot HGT NH (Netzah'Hod) = 5 x 100 = 500, since 
a Sefira in Bina equals 100. And this occurs thanks to the MAN raised by one who 
is uncertain of his intentions (whether or not he acts for the Creator’s sake). 

The “reverse man” then makes a Zivug with his Nukva on this false MAN, 
and receives the Upper Light for the construction of his Partzuf, much like the 
spiritually pure Heavens that were created on the pure MAN. Also, the new 
Heavens created on the impure MAN are called “reverse,” “empty.” And since the 
impure Malchut took part in this, these Heavens are called Tohu (abyss/chaos). 



Who Is Your Partner? 


221 


69. And this reverse man then flies across the empty firmament, traversing 
6,000 Parsaot in one bound. And as soon as this empty firmament stops, 
an impure woman emerges at once, seizes onto this empty firmament, and 
partakes in it. She leaves it and slays hundreds of thousands, for as long as she 
remains in this firmament, she has the authority and power to fly and traverse 
the whole world in an instant. 

All that stems from the empty firmament stems from the impure force, which 
is correspondingly opposite the Supernal, holy wisdom of Ohr Hochma. The 
Sefira Hochma equals 1,000, and so it is written that it flies across the firmament 
in 6,000 = six Sefirot HGT NHY of Partzuf Hochma, each of which equals 1,000. 

After the new heavens of the impure male part, called the “empty heavens,” 
were completed, the power of its female half, Nukva (“the great abyss”), was 
revealed. Her force attacked the firmament with falsehood by the Creator’s 
name; she soared through the sky, and the heavens were then called Tohu. 

Since Nukva of the impure forces partakes in this firmament, she becomes 
stronger and grows even more than the male level of the impure part. This is 
because the male impure part reaches up to VAK of Hochma, which equals 6,000 
Parsaot, whereas Nukva grows to the full ten Sefirot, i.e., the entire world. 

Therefore, she is immensely powerful and can destroy many, for, as Rashi 
says, “The Creator created one opposite the other.” And just as new, Holy 
Heavens and lands are created thanks to the MAN raised by the righteous, new, 
impure heavens and lands are created through the MAN raised by those who do 
not know exactly how one should work for the Creator. 

70. It is written of it: “Do not facilitate fruitless transgression.” Transgression 
is related to the male part, and is as heavy as wagon shafts. What is this 
transgression? It is the impure Nukva. With reins she draws the male impure 
part to fruitlessness. And then, as a result, a transgression is committed, as 
the male part draws itself towards this Nukva, who grows strong and flies off 
to slay people. And many does she slay. And who is it that caused all this? It 
is those that study the Torah, but do not attain Ohrah and M orah (Light and 
bestowal). May the Creator be merciful to them! 

As was already mentioned above, the male impure part is not as evil as the 
female part. This is so because it makes itself similar to the holy part of the 
creature; hence, it is called fruitless. However, due to this similarity, it has great 
power to ensnare man, as, for example, just as the sages do, it encourages people 
to study the Torah. Yet, its goals are different from that of the Creator; it wants 
to receive wisdom (Hochma), and not to become altruistic. 



222 


The Zohar 


And after one is caught in its toils, die male impure force makes a Z ivug 
with its impure Nukva, and, like heavy wagon shafts, they pull man into an abyss 
so great and dark that he doesn’t even realize that he is in darkness. On the 
contrary, he considers himself wise and righteous. The male part only catches 
man, binds him, and then brings him to the impure Nukva and casts him at her 
feet. Only then does he falter, falls into the great abyss and perishes. 

71. Rabbi Shimon said to his friends: “I beg of you not to utter any discernments 
from the Torah, no matter what you may hear from the Great Tree of Truth, 
so that you would not assist the impure Nukva in slaying multitudes of people 
for naught.” They all opened and mouthed: “Save us, O Merciful One! Save 
us, O Merciful One!” 

Rabbi Shimon said that if you have attained the discernment yourselves, 
then you are allowed, but if not, you must listen to the Great Tree (the great 
learned sage, whose wisdom and purity can be trusted) to learn how to work 
for the Creator. 

72. Come and see, the Creator created the world by the Torah. And He looked 
into the Torah not once, not twice, not thrice, and not four times. Only after 
that did He create the world. This should show people how not to err. 

73. Opposite these four times, the Creator saw, counted, prepared, and 
investigated what He had created. It is therefore written, “Beresheet (In 
the beginning) Barah (created) Elokim (the Creator) Et (the)”—four words, 
corresponding to the four above. And then, it is written: “Heaven”—opposite 
all four words, for the Creator looked into the Torah before He began to 
manifest His thought into reality. 

The four words signify four time periods or four Sefirot H-B-ZA-M. ’’Saw” 
designates Hochma, “counted”— Bina, “prepared”—ZA, and “investigated”— 
Malchut. After these four, the Creator created what He created. 

We find the same in the Torah: Beresheet is Hochma, Barah is Bina, Elokim is 
ZA, and Et (the) is Malchut, which includes everything from Aleph to Tav— all the 
letters and all the properties. Hence, she is designated in the Torah by the word 
Et = Aleph'Tav (from the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, Aleph, to the last, 
Tav). And after these four, He created the Heavens and the earth, i.e., revealed 
the next, lower degree, below Malchut. 



The Donkey Driver 


74. Rabbi Elazar, the son of Rabbi Shimon, was on his way to visit his father- 
in-law, Rabbi Yosi, the son of Lakunya, and Rabbi Aba accompanied him. A 
man followed behind them, driving their donkeys. Rabbi Aba said, “Let us 
open the gates of the Torah, as it is time to correct our path.” 

In Aramaic, the language in which The Zohar was written, “driver” means 
“one who pricks.” This is because the donkey driver’s function amounts to 
forcing the donkeys to move by pricking them with the edge of his stick. 

75. Rabbi Elazar opened and said, “It is written: My Sabbaths you are to 
observe.” Let us see: the Creator created the world in six days. And each day 
would reveal His deeds, and gave strength to that day. When did He reveal 
His deeds and give them strength? On the fourth day of creation, for the first 
three days were concealed completely, and would not be revealed. The fourth 
day arrived, and He revealed the deeds and forces of all the days. 

The phrase “He gave that day strength” means that He gave everything to 
the day of Shabbat. For the six days are Sefirot HGT NHY that reveal on Shabbat 
(Malchut) the work and the forces that were carried out during these days. 

Yet, if the deeds of all the days are concealed, and only reveal at their end, 
on Shabbat, then why is it written that they are revealed on the fourth day of 
creation? The thing is that Malchut is called both the fourth and the seventh days: 
she is fourth with regard to the first three Sefirot HGT, called the “Patriarchs” 
(Hesed is Avraham, Gevura is Yitzchak, and Tifferet is Yaakov), and seventh with 
regard to the six Sefirot, after three additional Sefirot, called the “Sons”: Netzah is 
Moshe, Hod is Aaron, and Yesod is Yosef. 

Malchut herself is King David—the day of Shabbat. Malchut grows and gradually 
accumulates her corrections in two principal stages, called lbur (conception). 
The first three days correspond to lbur Aleph (the first conception), and the 


223 



224 


The Zohar 


second three days correspond to Pour Bet (the second conception, Gadlut, the 
reception of Ohr Hochma). 

In other words, Malchut is gradually created from Sefirot HGT of ZA in three 
days, and forms on the fourth day as the Sefira Netzah de ZA. Hence, at this stage in 
her growth, Malchut is referred to as fourth from the Patriarchs. And then Shabbat 
comes to our land ( Malchut is called both land/earth and Shabbat). The state that 
Malchut achieves as a result of her growth from Sefirot NHY of ZA is called Shabbat 
on earth. And this state she attains as the seventh Sefira from all the Sefirot of ZA. 

The first three days are not revealed in Malchut, for as long as a Partzuf 
lacks Malchut, it is defined as concealed or secret. The weekdays are defined so. 
And when Malchut completely attains the degree where she stands, she thereby 
attains herself. This state is defined as Shabbat. 

However, if Malchut receives from the six Sefirot de ZA, shouldn’t they (the six 
weekdays) be more important than Malchut-Shabbat (inferior Sefira with regard 
to those she receives from)? 

The truth is that all the weekdays constitute individual degrees of correction 
(weekdays’ work) that are devoid of Malchut. Hence, they are called “weekdays,” 
for a Partzuf without Malchut is considered a closed degree, unable to receive 
Light, and is therefore deprived of holiness. After all, in the absence of Malchut, 
there is no GAR of the Light, Ohr Hochma. And only when Malchut is revealed 
in the Partzuf (signifying the arrival of Shabbat) is the holiness of the ENTIRE 
degree revealed; ENTIRE, because all six days receive what they have earned, 
and the Light shines in all the weekdays thanks to them alone. 

When the first three days of creation HGT emerged before the emergence 
of Malchut, these three Sefirot were devoid of Light, i.e., they were concealed. 
And when Malchut appeared, the fourth day arrived, and the importance and 
holiness of all four days manifested, for Malchut complements the entire degree, 
and the perfection of creation becomes revealed thanks to her. In the language 
of Kabbalah, this is described in the following way: all six days of creation are 
Ohr Hochma, and Shabbat is Ohr Hassadim. Ohr Hochma is present on weekdays, 
but cannot shine for lack of Ohr Hassadim, and when Ohr Hassadim arrives on 
Shabbat, all the Ohr Hochma shines thanks to this Ohr Hassadim of Shabbat. 

76. There is fire, water and air—HQT—the three first days of creation. 
Although they are the initial Supernal foundations of all that will follow, 
their actions are not revealed until the earth, meaning Malchut, reveals them. 
Only then does the work of each of the Supernal foundations reveal itself. 
Hence, the power of the first three days is revealed only on the fourth. 



The Donkey Driver 


225 


77. However, the third day may be better described as one that reveals the 
creation of the first three days, as it is written: LET THE EARTH BRING 
FORTH GRASS. That is to say, the revelation of the earth’s (Malehut’s) deeds 
already took place on the third day. Yet, although it was written on the third 
day, Tifferet, it was actually the fourth day, M alchut. Malchut joined the 
third day, for Tifferet and Malchut are inseparable. And then the fourth day 
revealed its deeds—to elucidate the work of each and every one of HQT, for 
the fourth day is the “fourth leg” of the Supernal Throne (the Sefira Bina), 
whose four legs are HQTM (Hesed, Qevura, Tifferet, and Malchut). 

Malchut reveals the holiness and spiritual power of the three days. Therefore, 
Malchut ascended and joined the third day, so as to reveal by the unity of these 
three days (three lines) their exalted spiritual essence. 

It is hence written that the deed is revealed on the fourth day, for Malchut 
alone completes their revelation at the conclusion of the three days. And 
afterwards, three more days emerge, which are NHY. After the revelation of 
the holiness of the first three days, HGT, called the “Patriarchs,” which are the 
foundation of ZA, ZA enters them (his main part is manifested), and the time 
comes for the Sons (NHY, the last three of the six days of creation) to be born. 

This is why it is written that ZA is defined as the fourth leg of the throne 
of Bina, and the throne remains imperfect and incomplete until its fourth leg 
(foundation) manifests. Indeed, ZA is incomplete until Malchut manifests within 
him, i.e., until the fourth day arrives. And only after the emergence of Malchut 
can ZA father the Sons—the three final days of creation. 

78. All of the actions of all the Sefirot, both on the first three days of creation, 
HQT, and on the last three, NHY, are dependent on the day of Shabbat, 
Malchut, QAR of the entire degree of ZA and its perfection. Hence, it is 
written, AND THE CREATOR RESTED ON THE SEVENTH DAY, 
SHABBAT. This refers to the fourth leg of the throne, as the seventh and the 
fourth days are both Malchut. Only the fourth day is Malchut that includes 
the Sefira Tifferet of ZA, from his chest upwards. Also, the seventh day is 
Malchut of the entire ZA, and they merge together face to face in a Zivug. 

Although the first three days, HGT, end with the fourth day (the result of 
their actions), they nonetheless remain not entirely complete; their perfection 
manifests only on Shabbat, together with the last three days, NHY. 

It is therefore written that Shabbat is the fourth leg of the throne, even 
though it is the seventh day, for, although it emerges after the Sons, it also 
completes the deeds of the Patriarchs, as the first three days did not complete 



226 


The Zohar 


their corrections on the fourth day, and a seventh day, Shabbat, is needed to 
complete them. 

The reason for this is that on the fourth day, Malchut is in the state of 
Katnut, called the small phase of the Moon. As a result, the Moon ( Malchut) 
returns to the state called Shabbat, when all the Light of all the days of creation 
manifest and shine within her. This is why the Light of the first three days of 
creation becomes revealed only on Shabbat. 

79. Yet, if Shabbat is Malchut, then why does the Torah say, “My Sabbaths 
you are to observe,” implying two? It is written of the two parts of Shabbat: 
the night ( Malchut ) and the day (ZA) that shines in Malchut. Thus, there 
is no division between them, for they merge face to face in a Zivug, and are 
therefore called two Sabbaths. 

He asks: two Malchuyot (plural for Malchut ) of the fourth and the seventh days 
are completely separate, as is written, “You shall keep my Sabbaths,” implying 
two? Yet, when we clarify that the fourth day manifests in perfection only on the 
seventh day, it becomes clear that there is only one Shabbat. But what is meant 
here is ZA and Malchut that shine in the holiness of Shabbat, for this day is the 
male, bestowing part (Zachar) that manifests in the female part ( Malchut or Nukva). 
Hence, they are called Sabbaths (plural). However, by merging in perfection, they 
become a single whole. As a result, ZA also assumes the name of Shabbat. 

80. Following behind them with the donkeys, the donkey driver asked: “Why 
is it said, ‘You shall fear sanctity?’” They replied: “This refers to the sanctity of 
Shabbat.” The donkey driver asked: “What is the sanctity of Shabbatl” They 
replied: “It is the sanctity that descends from Above, from AVI.” He said to 
them, “If that is so, then Shabbatot (plural for Shabbat) are without sanctity, 
for sanctity descends on it from Above, from AVI.” Rabbi Aba answered him: 
“It is indeed so.” And it is said: “And call Shabbat a delight, a holy day dedicated 
to the Creator.” Shabbat and a holy day are mentioned separately. The donkey 
driver asked: “If that is so, then what does a holy day mean to the Creator?” 
He replied: “That is when sanctity descends from Above, from ZA, and fills 
Shabbat, Malchut.” The donkey driver objected, “But if sanctity descends 
from Above, then Shabbat itself is not a holy day. And yet, it is written, ‘You 
shall sanctify Shabbat,’ meaning Shabbat itself.” Rabbi Elazar said to Rabbi 
Aba, “Leave this man alone, for there is much wisdom in him, of which we do 
not know.” So he said to the donkey driver, “Speak, and we shall listen.” 

The donkey driver’s question is this: if Shabbat is ZA, then why is it described 
as holy? After all, sanctity is the property of AVI, and only AVI are called holy. 



The Donkey Driver 


227 


Hence, he objected that Shabbat should be separated from sanctity. Shabbat (ZA) 
is not holiness in itself, but because it receives holiness from Above, from AVI. 
That, which ZA receives from AVI is what is called the Creator’s holiness. 

81. The donkey driver opened and said, “It is written: Shabbatot, i.e., there 
are usually two. And this alludes to the border of Shabbat, which is 2,000 
Amah (cubits) in each direction from the city. This is why the word Et was 
added before the word Shabbatot, which designates the plural form—both the 
Upper Shabbat and the lower Shabbat joining into one.” 

Although it is said: “Man shall not leave his place on the seventh day” 
(Shemot, 16), i.e., the singular form is used, in many places in the Torah, the 
word Et is used; for example, in the sentence: “Et 2,000 Amah in each direction 
from its place.” The word Et, consisting of the first and the last letters of the 
alphabet, Aleph and Tav, designates Malchut entering into union with ZA, 
which signifies the state of Shabbat; hence, the Light of AVI becomes revealed 
and shines (as a supplementary luminescence) upon ZON. This is because AVI 
are called “two thousand,” and so the word Et is present here to designate a 
supplement of Light to Shabbat. 

There exist a Sbabbat Above and a Shabbat below: the Upper Shabbat is Partzuf 
Tvuna, and the lower part of Partzuf Bina, whereas the lower Shabbat is Partzuf 
Malchut, Nukva de ZA of the world of Atzilut. In the world of Atzilut, Partzuf Bina 
is divided into two Partzufim: the Upper Part of Bina is called Partzuf AVI and the 
lower part of Bina (the part where she receives the Light from the Upper Part 
so as to pass it to ZA) is called Partzuf YESHSUT (Israel Saba ve Tvuna) or simply 
Tvuna. The relationship between Bina-AVI and Tvuna is similar to that of ZA 
and Malchut. Bina is called the “Upper World” and Malchut is called the “lower 
world.” On Shabbat, ZON ascend to Bina, ZA to AVI, and Malchut to Tvuna. 

On Shabbat, Malchut merges with Tvuna. However, this does not mean that 
no difference is left between them, for Malchut receives the Light from Tvuna 
only because she ascends to Tvuna’s level. Yet, at her place on the last, lowest 
degree of the world of Atzilut, Malchut is unable to receive the Light from Tvuna. 
And to the extent that Malchut cannot yet receive the Light from Tvuna in her 
regular state, she is defined as “closed.” 

Also, Tvuna suffers from Malchut being closed because while in her place, 
Malchut cannot receive the Light from Tvuna, for the revelation of Tvuna is 
possible only through Malchut. On Shabbat, Tvuna and Ima join to form one 
Partzuf, which is not closed. Yet, since its Light shines only when Malchut ascends 
to it, Tvuna feels the closed state of Malchut, and suffers, too. 



228 


The Zohar 


82. One Shabbat was left, unmentioned Above, and felt ashamed. She said to 
Him, “The Creator of the universe, from the day I was created, I am called 
Shabbat, but there is no day without night.” The Creator replied to her: “My 
daughter, you are Shabbat, and I have given you this name. But now I am 
surrounding and adorning you with the most exalted adornment.” He then 
raised His voice and proclaimed, “Those who sanctify shall fear. And this is 
the night of Shabbat that radiates fear.” But who is she? It is the merging 
together of I (M alchut, the nights of Shabbat ) with the Creator Himself (ZA) 
into a single whole. And I’ve heard from my father that the word Et refers 
to the boundaries-borders of Shabbat. Shabbatot (two Sabbaths) denote a 
circle and a square within, which total two. According to them, there are 
two sanctities we should mention during the Shabbat blessing: Vayechulu 
consists of thirty-five words, and Kiddush, too, consists of thirty-five words. 
Collectively, they make up to the seventy names of ZA, with which ZA (the 
Creator), and M alchut (the Assembly of Israel) adorn themselves. 

83. Since the circle and square are Shabbatot, they are both included in the 
instruction, “My Shabbatot you are to observe.” However, the Upper Shabbat 
is not included in the instruction “Observe,” but rather in “Remember.” For 
the Supernal King, Bina is as perfect as memory. This is why Bina is called 
“King,” whose perfection lies in peace and in memory. Hence, there is no 
contradiction Above. 

Malchut de Malchut is called the central point of creation, and receives no 
Light even on Shabbat, as, being a Man’ula (lock), she is closed to the Light. 
And the entire Light enters her only in the form of Miftacha (key), into Yesod de 
Malchut, in Malchut that joins Bina with her properties, while Malchut herself is 
therefore referred to as “locked.” 

This central point of creation is the only thing that the Creator created, and 
is comprised of all the creatures, including human souls. And she argues with 
the Creator that in the beginning of creation, in the world of AK, the entire 
Light was revealed and shone upon the creatures thanks to her, for there was no 
other Malchut in the world of AK, except for the central point. And only due to 
Tzimtzum Bet (second restriction), now in the world of Atzilut, was she restricted 
and closed to the reception of Light. 

And this is a great and wonderful secret, for, as Malchut objects, even on 
the first day, it is said: “And there shall be evening, and there shall be morning- 
one day.” (Beresheet, 1:6) In other words, unity is revealed in both night and 
day together. Yet, why is the night of the first Shabbat not mentioned in the 



The Donkey Driver 


229 


Torah, and only die words “on die seventh day” are used? The Creator replied 
to Malchut that a future Shabbat is implied— Shabbat of the seventh millennium, 
when the day of Shabbat will come and remain forever. 

Meanwhile, during the 6,000 years, the Creator elevates Malchut to Bina, and 
as a result, she receives Supernal Adornments, greater than the ones she had had 
in the world of A K. For there she acted as the end of all Sefirot, but now she has 
risen to act in the place of GAR, in AVI, which are called “holy of holies.” 

If Malchut is in Y esod, the lack of Ohr Hochma is felt. But if Malchut ascends 
to AVI (where Ohr Hassadim is present, and there is absolutely no need for Ohr 
Hochma ), this state is defined as perfect. 

Malchut is called “fear,” for she was restricted to refrain from receiving the 
Creator’s Light within her desire to receive pleasure. Therefore, she does not 
receive the Light from Above within her desire to receive pleasure. Instead, 
she receives the Light only in Ohr Hozer (Returning Light), when she refuses 
to use her egoism. 

This occurs in the following way: first, Ohr Yashar (Direct Light) comes from 
the Creator to Malchut and wishes to enter her ( Malchut feels both the delight 
and her own desire to receive and enjoy it). Secondly, by wishing to be like the 
Creator, Malchut repels the Light (prohibits herself from receiving the delight). 

This renunciation of egoistic pleasure is called Ohr Hozer (Returning Light), 
because Malchut repels the Light (pleasure) from her. Thirdly, after Malchut 
has created Ohr Hozer, she begins to receive Ohr Yashar in it (her new desire 
to receive only because the Creator wants her to). This reception is possible 
because Malchut has an anti-egoistic force, will power, called a screen. 

The spiritual world is a realm of sensations, desires, and forces, not vested 
in shells-garments, like the corporeal bodies in our world. Similarly, all the 
characters depicted in Kabbalah do not designate any images; rather, they 
demonstrate interactions of forces and properties. 

Therefore, a circle implies that the Light shines completely unrestrictedly in 
every place and to the same extent, so there can be no change in its radiance. 
A square or a rectangle indicates restrictions, which create differences between 
the sides: right and left, top and bottom. Hence, the head has a round shape 
with regard to the rectangular shape of the body, for the Rosh (head) is free of 
restrictions, but VAK (body) are not. 

Shabbat is a spiritual state, when ZON ascend to AVI and clothe them. As 
a result, the lower Shabbat (ZON) and the Upper Shabbat (AVI) merge into one. 



230 


The Zohar 


The Upper Shabbat (AVI) is designated by a circle, and the lower Shabbat (ZON) 
is designated by a square. On Shabbat, ZON merge with AVI, depicted as the 
square’s ascent and insertion into the circle. 

Ohr Hochma is designated by the letter Ayin. Since Ohr Hochma is revealed 
only during the ascent of the lower Shabbat to the Upper, Ohr Hochma is 
divided into two parts: one half for the Upper Shabbat, and one for the lower. 
Hence, the passage of Vayechulu (Beresheet, 2:1) consists of thirty-five words 
that refer to half of the Light of the Upper Shabba t, whereas the blessing itself 
consists of thirty-five words that refer to half of the Light of the lower Shabbat. 
And the common soul, called the “Assembly of Israel” or Malchut (Shabbat), is 
adorned with this Light. 

Since the circle and the square merge and assume the name Shabba tot (two 
Shabbats), the Light of both the circle and the square is defined as protecting— 
GUARD. And, although the word GUARD alludes to restrictions and borders 
that one must observe and fear violating, whereas the Upper Shabbat (designated 
by a circle) has no restrictions and borders, due to the joining of the two Shabbatot 
into one, there still appeared restrictions and borders. 

The Upper Shabbat is called REMEMBER, and not OBSERVE, as it is 
completely free of restrictions. However, since it merged with the lower Shabbat, 
called OBSERVE, it, too, needs to GUARD, which normally relates to Malchut 
alone. Only due to Malchut’s ascent to Bina did the need to guard, which is 
present in Malchut, arose in Bina. But Bina herself remains only in the property of 
REMEMBER, for only egoistic desires to receive pleasure need GUARDING. 

The Upper Shabbat (Bina) is designated by the letters MI = Mem-Yod. The 
lower Shabbat (Malchut) is designated by the letters MA = Mem-Hey, and has the 
form of a square, which implies a presence of controversy between its properties— 
the right and the left sides, which give it its square form. 

84. There are two types of peace below: one is Yaakov (Tifferet), and the other 
is Yosef (Yesod). Therefore, PEACE is written twice in the greeting: “PEACE, 
PEACE to the distant one and to the near one.” “The distant one” refers to 
Yaakov, and “the near one” refers to Yosef. Or, as it is written, “From afar I 
see the Creator,” “Came to a stop far in the distance.” 

“Below” signifies ZON, containing one of the properties, Yaakov or the Sefira 
Tifferet de ZA. ZON also contain the property called Yosef, or Yesod. Both these 
Sefirot indicate the place of a potential Zivug between ZA and Malchut, for Peace 
signifies Zivug. The Upper Zivug (Yaakov) is intended for reception of Ohr Hochma 
from Above, and the lower Zivug (Yosef) fills Malchut only with Ohr Hassadim. 



The Donkey Driver 


231 


It was already mentioned that it is impossible to receive Ohr Hochma without 
it being clothed in Ohr Hassadim. Ohr Hochma or the Zivug that is made on it is 
therefore defined as distant, for it must first be clothed in Ohr Hassadim before 
it can receive Ohr Hochma. Hence, it is written, “From afar I saw the Creator.” 

The lower Zivug is called “the near one,” because the Partzuf receives Ohr 
Hassadim without any preliminary actions. Furthermore, with the help of this 
Ohr Hassadim, the Partzuf subsequently receives Ohr Hochma. This is why the 
word “peace” is used twice: “Peace, peace to the far and to the near”—a greeting 
to Yaakov and Yosef, respectively, both of whom take part in the great Zivug (the 
reception of Ohr Hochma ) in ZA. 

These two greetings are defined in ZON as a square, as there is controversy 
between them, defined as the controversy between the right and the left sides, 
and they end in the letter Hey—Nukva or Malchut, whereas the Upper Nukva 
(Bina ) ends with the letter Yod, which designates not the female part, but the 
male. Hence, there is no controversy in her. 

Even the notions of “near” and “far” do not exist in Bina herself, for 
she refers to GAR, perfection, and GAR can receive Ohr Hochma nearby, 
meaning they do not need to clothe in Ohr Hassadim beforehand, but can 
receive Ohr Hochma without Ohr Hassadim. Hence, it is said that the Upper 
Malchut is the King, who has peace. Thus, unlike ZON, two notions of peace 
are absent in him. 

85. “From afar” is the Supernal Point, standing in His palace, of which it is said, 
“You are to guard.” “You shall fear My sanctity” refers to the point standing 
in the center, which must be feared more than anything, for its punishment 
is death, as it is written, “All who transgress in it shall perish.” Who are these 
transgressors? They are those who have entered the space of the circle and the 
square, and committed a sin. Hence, it is written, “You shall fear!” This point 
is called “I,” and there is a prohibition on its revelation, called HaVaYaH. “1” 
and HaVaYaH are a single whole. Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba dismounted 
from their donkeys and kissed him. They said, “So great is your wisdom, and 
yet you drive donkeys behind us! Who are you, then?” He replied to them: 
“Do not ask me who I am, but let us go on and study the Torah. Each of us 
will speak his wisdom so as to illuminate our path.” 

The distant point refers to the point that opens the way to the Partzuf for 
thirty-two streams of Ohr Hochma. And this is the letter Bet in the first word 
of the Torah— Beresheet, called the “point in the hall,” from which Ohr Hochma 
descends to ZON, when ZON ascend to AVI. For then, the two Shabbatot (the 



232 


The Zohar 


Upper—AVI and the lower—ZON) merge. It is written about them: “I saw the 
Creator from afar,” for ZON cannot receive Ohr Hochma without being clothed 
in O hr Hassadim. 

Hochma and Bina, called the “point in the hall,” are referred to as “distant 
from ZON,” for they need the garment of Ohr Hassadim from the lower world, 
Nukva, called MA. Malchut of the world of AK is the central point, called the 
“lock,” whereas Malchut of the world of Atzilut (the point in the hall) is the 
“key,” as the Light from ZAT de Bina (YESHSUT) can be received in it. 

The circle is called AVI, the square—ZON. ZON ascend to AVI and thus 
the square enters the circle. As a result, two properties appear in Malchut of 
AVI: the “lock” ( Malchut de Malchut, the central point or Malchut de AVI), and 
the “key” (the point in the hall, Yesod de Malchut or Malchut de YESHSUT). 
Malchut de AVI is called space, for she is unattainable, and he who wishes to 
fill her with Light is punished by death. It is written about it: “You shall fear 
My sanctity.” 

The point itself is called “I,” and AVI is HaVaYaH that merges with it. And 
they are defined as a single whole; hence, the point itself is referred to as AVI, 
meaning that it is characterized as holy, as the property of AVI. 

As was already mentioned before, The Zohar and the entire Torah speak 
exclusively of spiritual degrees, the structure of spiritual worlds, and the 
revelation of the Creator’s governance to us. There is not a word in the Torah 
that refers to our world. The whole Torah is, as it is said, “The Creator’s sacred 
names.” And those who reduce it from its spiritual heights to the corporeal level 
with their commentaries cast it down completely. 

Rashi says that the Torah only speaks in human tongue, but it tells us of man’s 
spiritual paths toward his Creator. Therefore, when we read that one Rabbi went 
to visit another, the real meaning is that one spiritual degree, called, for example, 
Rabbi Elazar, passes to another spiritual degree, called, for example, Rabbi Yosi. 

ZA has his own AVI, who are called the Upper AVI. The wife of ZA ( Nukva 
or Malchut) contains AVI, too, called YESHSUT. First, ZA attains the AVI of his 
wife (YESHSUT or Ohr Hassadim). Then it rises to a Higher Degree and attains 
the AVI themselves— Ohr Hochma (also called Ohr Haya). 

The righteous who ascend the spiritual degrees are the constituents of 
FartzufZA. Since the degree of Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba is Ohr Hassadim (the 
Light of Neshama), this ascent means it went to (spiritually) see (in Ohr Hochma) 
another spiritual degree. 



The Donkey Driver 


233 


In the spiritual worlds, the donkey driver constitutes a special spiritual force 
that helps the souls of the righteous move from one spiritual degree to another. 
Without this help sent by the Creator from Above, it is impossible to exit your 
degree and ascend to the next. Hence, the Creator sends a Higher soul from 
Above to each of the righteous (those who wish to ascend). Each receives his 
own, according to his degree, properties, and purpose. 

And so, at first the righteous fails to recognize this exalted soul; he 
considers it low, that it leeched onto him on his spiritual path. Such state 
is called Ibur —conception of the righteous’ soul. Since the Higher soul has 
not yet completed its assistance and purpose, it is not yet perceived by the 
righteous for what it really is. 

However, after it completes its task in its entirety, and brings the righteous’ 
soul to the Upper Degree for which it is intended, the righteous then reveals 
the exalted properties of the soul that helped him. This is referred to as the 
revelation of the soul to the righteous. 

In our case, the soul that was sent to help the souls of Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi 
Aba was the soul of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba—a very exalted and perfect soul, the 
Light of Yechida. Yet, initially, it is revealed to the righteous in its smallest scope, 
called Ibur, conception (in sensations). Hence, they perceive it as the level of a 
spiritual donkey driver—a simple soul. 

The Hebrew word for donkey is Hamor, which also means matter, Homer ! 
Thus, one who can control his donkey, his body, his desires, ascends above matter 
as a spiritual being. And since he wishes to ascend above matter in his desires, he 
is considered a righteous. However, here, The Zohar speaks of Higher Degrees. 

The donkey driver’s task is to take the riders, mounted atop of their donkeys, 
from place to place; yet, he walks in front of his donkeys, thereby leading them 
through spiritual degrees. Since every word in the Torah has several meanings, 
due to the multiplicity of the Upper Roots (wherefrom word notions descend), 
the notion of a “donkey driver” is more precisely referred to as a “donkey guide,” 
and implies properties that are coarse, sinful, and most base. 

Therefore, Rabbi Aba said: “Let us open the gates of the Torah, for the time 
has come for us to correct our path,” that is, to open their souls with the help 
of the secrets of the Torah, so their path would be correct and lead them to 
the Creator. Rabbi Elazar then began to discuss a passage from the Torah that 
says, “You shall observe my Shabbatot,” as he stood at this degree (the Light of 
YESHSUT) in his properties. He therefore concluded that Shabbat itself is the 
property of ZON, which has not yet reached the property of sanctity, but only 



234 


The Zohar 


receives the Light of YESHSUT on Shabbat. It is written about this Light, “You 
shall fear my sanctity,” for when Ohr Hochma passes from YESHSUT to ZA, it 
evokes fear in them. 

And here they receive the donkey driver’s help, who reveals to them the 
secret of Ohr Haya. He explains that the phrase “You shall observe my Shabbatot” 
signifies the Upper and the lower Shabbatot, which come together, due to the 
ascent of ZON to AVI. As a result, ZON themselves become holy (the square 
within the circle) and acquire the properties of Bina: mercy, altruism, Ohr 
Hassadim. Hence, it is written with regard to them: fear not and observe. For 
Ohr Haya repels foreign, impure forces and desires, and all restrictions are lifted 
on Shabbat ; hence, there is no fear. 

And, according to the donkey driver’s explanation, the phrase “You shall 
fear My sanctity” refers only to the central point that is used in GAR de AVI, in 
GAR of Ohr Haya, which is unattainable and where fear does exist. 

At that, the soul of the donkey driver has fulfilled its role, for it brought 
them to the attainment of Ohr Haya. Only then did they merit the attainment 
of the height of the soul that had helped them, since they attained its revelation 
and were thus able to appreciate it. 

This is why Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba dismounted from their donkeys 
and kissed him, for the attainment of the Upper One is defined as a “kiss.” 
However, this exalted soul has not yet finished aiding them: it must still help 
them attain Ohr Yechida. Yet, since the attainment of Ohr Haya already provides 
perfection, they’ve already attained thereby the degree of the son of Rabbi 
Hamnuna-Saba. 

The level of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba himself is the degree of attainment 
of Ohr Yechida. Therefore, by attaining only Ohr Haya, they mistakenly 
thought that the soul guiding them belongs to the son of Rabbi Hamnuna- 
Saba. However, after the donkey driver had revealed to them the secret of the 
attainment of Ohr Yechida, they realized that their companion is none other 
than Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba himself. 

And the reason why they could not recognize him before is that the powers 
of the helping soul cannot be seen until its role is fulfilled. Hence, they asked 
him to reveal his name, but he told them not to inquire about his name, for 
without having completed all the corrections, they do not merit the revelation 
of the secrets of the Torah. And he must help them in their studies of the 
Torah, for he still needs to illuminate their path, as they have not yet attained 
the desired goal. 



The Donkey Driver 


235 


86. He said to him: “Who appointed you to walk here and be a donkey driver?” 
He replied: “The letter Yod waged war with two letters, Chaf and Samech, for 
me to come and join. The letter Chaf did not want to leave its place because it 
has to support those who fall, for without a screen, they cannot survive.” 

87. The letter Yod came to me alone, kissed me and wept with me. It said to 
me, “My son, what can I do for you? I disappear from many good deeds and 
from secret, supernal, basic letters. But I shall return to you and will be of 
help to you. And I shall give you two letters that are more exalted than those 
that have disappeared—the letters Yod and Shin. They shall become for you a 
treasury that is forever full. So, my son, go and drive the donkeys. And that is 
why I am here in this role.” 

As we already know, the donkey driver is an auxiliary force given to someone 
who wishes to ascend to a higher spiritual degree on his path toward the Creator, 
just as donkeys carry people on their backs, thereby helping them travel from 
one place to another. As this happens, the righteous one falls from his previous 
degree and enters the embryonic state of the new degree, just as the soul that 
came to help him. However, the property of Ibur-embryo ( Ibur is also derived 
from the word Haavarah, crossing) means that all the Light that it had in the 
previous degree disappears upon the conception (Ibur) of a new, Higher Degree. 

And that is what they wanted to know of the donkey driver: “How did the 
Creator bring you here in the state of Ibur, in our state of Ibur, as a result of which 
the Light in us has disappeared? Who lowers you from the Higher Degrees?” 
And that is why the donkey driver replied that the letter Yod waged war against 
the letters Cha/and Samech, to join with them. The degree of Hassadim is called 
Samech (O hr Neshama). 

“When the time has come for you to attain Ohr Haya (Yod from HaVaYaH, 
the degree from which I descended to help you to attain Ohr Haya), Hochma 
really wanted to connect Ohr Neshama (that was previously in you) to me. And 
here Yod wages war against Chaf and Samech. Malchut of the Upper Partzuf 
clothes in the lower Partzuf, designated by the letter Chaf. There used to be Ohr 
Neshama, and now there is Ohr Haya, whereas Yod, which desires Ohr Neshama 
as well, merges with it, and rejects the Chaf.” 

This is so because the connection between the degrees, from the Highest 
Degree in the world of Atzilut to the end of the world of Assiya, is realized only 
by Malchut of the Upper One descending to the lower one and clothing in it. 
Malchut of the Upper One herself cannot descend from her degree of YESHSUT 



236 


The Zohar 


(the degree of Neshama) even for a moment, as the chain connecting the degrees 
would be instantly broken. 

The property of Samech is the property of the Light itself, which the soul 
receives from Sefirot HBD HGT of AVI (above the Chazeh), and which AVI pass 
to ZON when the letters are in Katnut, and support them (the Hebrew word for 
support is Somech, derived from the letter Samech) so that ZON will not fall from 
the world of Atzilut. 

The letter Chaf, Hassadim, is unwilling to leave its place and join Hochma, 
as it needs to connect the Upper Partzuf to the lower one. Thus, it must always 
remain in its place, for all the degrees are constant, and only the soul changes 
while moving from one degree to another within the worlds. This is why the 
soul is called the “inner part” with regard to the world (the external part)—the 
soul exists and moves about within the world by changing its properties. 

Hence, the Light of the soul did not wish to join the letter Yod (degree of 
Hochma, the soul of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba) as it descended to help Rabbi Elazar 
and Rabbi Aba. This is because they needed a new Light that would build a new 
degree within them, the degree of Ohr Haya, whereas each new degree is built from 
scratch, from the state of Vour (conception). As that happens, the entire previous 
degree with all of its Light disappears. Similarly, in their case, the new degree 
starts with Ihur and reaches the level of Haya. This resembles a seed that must 
first abandon its present form and rot, in order to become a tree afterwards. 

It is therefore written that it came to me without the Light of HBD HGT 
de AVI, called Samech, the Light of Hassadim. Samech is the property of mercy, a 
selfless desire to give, pure spiritual altruism. Hence, it is unwilling to join Yod, 
Ohr Hochma. Yet, Ohr Hochma cannot enter and fill the Partzuf without first 
being clothed in Ohr Hassadim, for this clothing of Ohr Hochma in Ohr Hassadim 
means that the Partzuf receives Ohr Hochma not for itself, but for the Creator’s 
sake. But Ohr Hassadim, Samech, does not wish to receive anything within itself; 
it wants nothing to do with Ohr Hochma ! This is why the letter Yod wept, being 
unable to fill the Partzuf with its Light, for Hassadim refused to accept Hochma. 

It is written in this regard: Hence, I must now disappear, and you, the donkey 
driver, go to the state of Ihur, to rebuild the degrees of gradual development of 
a new Partzuf-state with you: Ihur (embryo), Leidah (birth), Yenika (nursing), and 
Mochin (maturity). 

And know that such is the order of creating (begetting) each new degree: 
every time one is to attain a new degree, he must undergo (in his properties) a 
complete disappearance of the previous degree (level of attainment, Light), and 



The Donkey Driver 


237 


begin anew. He must receive new attainments, from the lowest new degree, Ohr 
Nefesh (Ibur ), to Ohr Ruach (Yenika), and so on, as though he had never attained 
any spiritual level at all. 

It is impossible to take with you anything from a previous degree. Hence, one 
must start anew from the lowest level of Ibur, called THE DONKEY DRIVER. 
Ohr Haya de AVI is called YESH ( Yod-Shin ), where Yod is Hochma and Shin is Bina. 
And, of course, they are more important than the Ohr Neshama that was in the 
Partzuf before them. 

88. Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba rejoiced, wept, and said, “You sit on the 
donkey, and we shall drive it.” He replied to them, “Have I not told you that 
it is the command of the King that I act as I do, until the other donkey driver 
appears” (this hints at the M ashiach, who, as it is said, will appear poor and 
riding a donkey). They said to him, “You have not even told us your name! 
Where do you dwell?” He told them, “My dwelling place is wonderful 
and very precious to me. It is a tower that soars in the air, grand and unique. 
Only two live in this tower: the Creator and I. That is the place, in which 
I dwell. And I am exiled from there in order to drive the donkeys.” Rabbi 
Elazar and Rabbi Aba looked at him, and his words were unclear to them, for 
they tasted sweeter than manna and honey. They said to him, “Perhaps you 
will tell us the name of your father, so that we could kiss the earth at his feet?” 
He responded, “What for? It is not my habit to boast of the Torah.” 

After they have attained the greatness of the donkey driver’s degree, they 
could no longer bear his small state of Ibur, which he inhabited for their sake. 
Hence, they told him that since they have already attained Ohr Hochma, he has 
done enough and can leave the state of Ibur. And should a need arise to add 
anything else to them, they would be able to enter Ibur on their own, and he 
does not need to suffer for their sake. 

However, the donkey driver warned them beforehand to not ask him his 
name, for they still require revelations of secrets of the Torah. Once again, he 
hinted that it is the degree of Ohr Yechida that they lack, which is implied here. 
This degree signifies the reception of the Light of the King Messiah’s face, 
which he mentioned by hinting at the poor donkey driver, as described by a 
prophet (Zachariah, 9:9). And he is commanded by the Creator to help them 
attain Ohr Yechida. 

This is why they asked him about the type of his soul: “For you did not wish 
to reveal your name, as we have not yet received from you that which we must 



238 


The Zohar 


attain. But if so, at least tell us where you live, what is your degree? At least then 
we will know what we lack, what else we must receive, attain from you.” 

He replied that his place is much higher than his present location, for now 
he himself cannot attain his own individual level. This is a result of the Upper 
Partzuf descending to die place of die lower one and becoming completely 
identical to it, and while there (in that state), die Upper Partzuf can no longer 
attain its own level. The tower that soars in die air is Bina, Hassadim. The 
Mashiach’s tower (die great tower) designates the time (state) of ascent to GAR de 
AA, when Ohr Hochma is available. 

89. But the place of my father’s dwelling was in the Great Sea. And he was 
a big fish that continually circled the Great Sea, from one end to the other. 
And he was mighty and he grew old, until he swallowed up all the other fish 
in that sea. And then he released them, and they were thriving and filled 
with all of the very best of the world. And it was in his power to swim across 
the entire sea in one instant. And He pulled him out and hauled him in 
with an arrow, like a warrior, and brought him to the place that I told you 
about, to the tower that soars in the air, but he returned to his place and 
disappeared in that sea. 

The concealed Z ivug is called Shaar HaNun (the 50 th gate). The Great Sea is 
Malchut. All the Zivugim from Partzuf Atik de Atzilut and below do not include 
the Great Sea in its entirety, all the Sefirot of Malchut, but only die first nine 
Sefirot of Malchut. Moreover, none of die Zivugim include Malchut de Malchut. 

This Sefira, Malchut de Malchut, is the only creation, because all die other 
Sefirot constitute properties of spiritual forces and desires above Malchut, existing 
in and referring to die Creator, die sole purpose of which is die correction of 
Malchut de Malchut. The only Zivug on this Malchut exists in Atik, and it will be 
revealed to all only at the end of correction. 

Rav Hamnuna-Saba emerged from this concealed Zivug in Atik; hence, die 
donkey driver calls him “my father.” And he says that his father lived in the 
Great Sea, as this Z ivug was on the entire Malchut, on Malchut de Malchut, called 
the “Great Sea.” 

Yet, if one were to argue that all Partzufim make a Z ivug on the Light with 
a screen that stands before Malchut, then that Z ivug was made on the 50 th gate, 
on all the parts of the desire, on the full depth of the Great Sea (Malchut), down 
to the very last of her desires and properties, from Keter de Malchut to Malchut 
de Malchut, from end to end of the Great Sea. Nevertheless, this occurs only 



The Donkey Driver 


239 


In Partzuf Atik de Atzilut, but not below it. And this is not the donkey driver 
himself, but his father. 

This occurs because the great Zivug absorbs all the other particular Zivugim 
(“swallows all the other fish in the Great Sea”) and all the souls in all the worlds, 
for they are all much weaker than it. Hence, it is as though they do not exist in 
its greatness and might. And since it includes absolutely everything, they are all 
called by the name Nunin, from the letter Nun (50). 

This indicates that after all the major corrections that follow this great Z ivug, 
all those Lights and souls, absorbed during its Z ivug, return and are born anew 
for eternal life, for they are completely filled with Light as a result of the great 
Z ivug, when the Light absorbed them completely. 

All the Zivugim below Partzuf Atik stem from unifications of the Sefirot with 
one another. These unifications are defined as interruptions in a Z ivug, whereas 
the Z ivug in Atik is direct and without unification. Thus, it is defined as “instant,” 
for it goes on uninterrupted. It is therefore written that “he crosses the entire 
sea in an instant,” without any garments-unifications. And it mounts an attack, 
for there is great power of reception of Ohr Hochma in this Z ivug; hence, he said: 
“Begets, like an arrow in the hands of a warrior.” 

It is written of this Z ivug in Partzuf Atik: “No one else but you saw the 
Creator.” However, no birth is possible without the forces of resistance, since, 
as is written: “The seed that is not shot like an arrow does not beget.” (Talmud, 
Hagigah, 16). Hence, after he had begotten me and hid me in the Great Tower, 
he returned to his concealed Z ivug. 

90. Rabbi Elazar contemplated his words and replied: “You are the son of the 
Holy Source, you are the son of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba, you are the son of the 
Source of the Torah, and you drive donkeys behind us!” They wept and kissed 
him, and continued their journey. Then he said: “If it pleases our master, let 
him reveal his name to us.” 

It is written “looked,” because sight signifies Hochma, and no other words, 
such as “said,” “heard” ( Bina ) or “thought” could be used in its stead. Since they 
have not yet attained to the full extent of perfection what the donkey driver 
had told them, and their attainment reached only as high as Ohr Haya, they 
were delighted with what was begotten by Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba, for Rabbi 
Hamnuna-Saba is Ohr Yechida. 

He asked him to reveal his name, that is, to receive his degree, for the 
attainment of a name denotes the attainment of the spiritual degree. Therefore, 
the saying, “the entire Torah consists only of the Creator’s names,” means that the 



240 


The Zohar 


entire Torah constitutes the degrees that one must attain, up to the very highest, 
called “Love” (“Introduction to The Study of the Ten Sefirot,” items 70-71). 

Each degree in the attainment of the Upper Worlds has its own name. All 
the Creator’s names: Moshe, Pharaoh, Avraham, the Temple, Sinai—every single 
word in the Torah—are degrees of perception of the Creator, degrees of attaining 
Him, for nothing exists besides man and his Creator. Everything else that exists 
in the world, as it seems to us, are the various degrees of our perception of the 
Creator Himself. He may appear to us as this world, and He may appear as the 
world of Assiya, as Yetzira, Beria, Atzilut, or He maybe revealed completely, without 
partial concealments of the spiritual world or total concealment of our world. 
Thus, the word O lam (world) is derived from the Haalamah (concealment). 

91. He opened and began. It is written, “Benayahu (Benaiah) Ben (the son 
of) Yehoyada (Jehoiada).” This narrative is beautiful, but it serves to show 
us the exalted secrets of the Torah. And the name Benayahu Ben-Yehoyada 
indicates the secret of the Light of Wisdom, Ohr Hochma. Ben Ish Chai 
is the righteous who revives the worlds. Rav Paalim means that He is the 
Master of all that transpires, and that all the forces and Supernal Troops 
stem from Him. He is called the Creator of Force, the Master of all, and He 
is in everything. 

It is written in Prophets: “Benayahu, the son of Yehoyada,” (Shmuel II, 
23:20). Here, The Zohar reveals to us the exalted secrets of the Torah, for the 
holy name of Yehoyada consists of two: Y od-Hey-Vav, the first three letters of 
HaVaYaH, and Yeda (knowledge). 

Keter of the world of Atzilut is called RADLA (unattainable head), whereas 
At ik itself surrounds all the other Partzufim of the world of Atzilut— AA, AVI, and 
ZON. Adk is called Makif (surrounding), for the other, lower Partzufim cannot 
attain it or its Z ivug. Moreover, they cannot attain anything that comes from it. 
In other words, there is nothing descending from At ik to the lower Partzufim. 
Even AA is concealed from them; hence, it is called the “concealed Hochma.” 
However, it is not defined as unattainable, like At ik, for it contains a Z ivug on 
Ohr Hochma. Nevertheless, this Light does not descend to the lower ones, but 
only a small luminescence from it, called He’arat Hochma, reaches them. 

And all the Light that fills the worlds through the 6,000 years comes from 
AVI and YESHSUT, who are called Hochma of the thirty-two paths or thirty-two 
forces ( Elokim ) of creation, i.e., thirty-two types of He’arat Hochma. This Light of 
Hochma is the result of Bina’s ascent to AA, where she receives Ohr Hochma and 
shines downward. Therefore, all the Light of Hochma that is revealed through 



The Donkey Driver 


241 


the 6,000 years, before the end of correction, is no more than the Light of Bina, 
which received O hr Hochma upon ascending to AA. 

AA is called Yeda (knowledge) because it gives Ohr Hochma to Bina, and 
knows all the routes of Ohr Hochma into Bina and through her on to the lower 
ones. While making a Zivug, AA itself does not pass its Light downwards, but 
as AVI ascend to AA, they receive Ohr Hochma, called “thirty-two streams” or 
“paths of wisdom,” which can be attained by the lower ones. 

Everything that is written in The Zohar refers to all the souls in general. 
However, there are exceptions that are not normally studied. There exist special, 
exalted souls that merit becoming a Kli, MAN for the great Zivug of RADLA 
after their exile, and to receive from this Zivug in the Upper World the degree 
of Yechida. These are the souls of Benayahu Ben-Yehoyada, Rabbi Hamnuna- 
Saba and a very few chosen others. These exalted souls reveal themselves to the 
righteous in this world, and as a result, the righteous merit delighting in Ohr 
Yechida, which shines only in such exalted souls, while still being in this world. 

Therefore, the name of Benayahu Ben-Yehoyada indicates that it stems from 
the inner wisdom, the unattainable Light of Hochma of At ik. This name also 
causes the concealment of the Light of Hochma, for the name Yehoyada: Yod-Hey- 
Vav + Yeda means that only he who attains the first three letters Yod-Hey-Vav of 
the Creator’s name HaVaYaH shall attain Him, and no other shall. 

Therefore, this name remains concealed in its place. At first, the donkey 
driver explains the quality of this Zivug in Atik— its height, the power of the Light 
that emerges onto it in Rosh de Atik, which the name of this Zivug, “Ben Ish Chai 
Rav Paalim ve Mekabtziel,” indicates. And then he explains what is concealed and 
what descends to the souls. 

It was already stated that this Z ivug takes place at the end of the correction of 
the entire Malchut. Hence, it includes all the individual Zivugim and the degrees 
that emerge on them through the 6,000 years. All the Lights accumulate into 
one. All the types of MAN combine into one and ascend to ask for this Z ivug, 
which includes all the suffering and punishments gradually accumulated during 
the 6,000 years. 

Hence, the height and greatness of this Z ivug and the degree of Light that 
emerges from it are infinite, and it destroys all the impure forces once and for 
all. Yesod de ZA, from which the Light of this Z ivug (the combination of all the 
Lights over the full course of the 6,000 years) is emanated, is called “Ish Chai Rav 
Paalim’’—a vivid man of many actions. However, Malchut, which contains within 



242 


The Zohar 


her all the MAN, suffering, and work performed during the 6,000 years, is called 
Mekabtziel (gathering one). 

The Zohar also calls it T zadik Chai Olamim— the righteous, who revives the 
worlds, for it thereby points to the Sefira Yesod, which gives the Light to Malchut. 
The Sefira Yesod does not have a place to receive the Light for itself. Hence, it 
lives (Chai) only to pass the Light to Malchut. This is why it is called T zadik (the 
righteous one), who revives the worlds ( Chai Olamim). 

Its other name, Rav Paalim (performing many actions) indicates that 
it includes all the MAD of all the good deeds and all the degrees that were 
revealed through the 6,000 years. This is because all these degrees are now being 
revealed all at once in a cumulative, integrated Light, as they leave Yesod and 
enter Malchut. And since Yesod now gathers all the Light that was emanated 
during the 6,000 years into one, and passes it to Malchut, this action determines 
its name—Rav Paalim. 

92. Rav Paalim is also Mekabtziel —the Exalted Tree, gathering and 
performing many actions, Supreme Above all. Where did it come from? 
From which degree did it originate? Once more, the source indicates—from 
Mekabtziel, for it is an exalted and concealed degree that none has seen. 
It includes everything, for it gathers all of the Upper Light within it, and 
everything originates from it. 

Malchut-Nukva is also named Mekabtziel, for she receives and gathers all the 
Light from Yesod within herself. Hence, Yesod is called Rav Paalim. The degree 
that emerges onto this Z ivug is called the “Supreme and Exalted Tree” that 
originated from Yesod and entered Malchut. The Zohar goes on to explain that to 
show us the quality and the origin of this exalted degree, the name Mekabtziel 
(gathering) is used; Yesod accumulates the Upper Light and passes it to Nukva. 
And both Yesod and Malchut are called Mekabtziel. 

And the degree that emerges onto this Z ivug of Yesod and Malchut is called 
“None but you has seen the Creator.” This degree emerges after the complete 
correction has been achieved, at the moment of attachment of the final correction 
that completes them all. Therefore, this degree is defined as all-inclusive, for it 
collects all the Light over the full course of 6,000 years, and thereby manifests at 
once in its true perfection. 

93. All of the degrees gather in this Supernal, Sacred, and Concealed Hall, 
where everything is concealed. All of the worlds are inside that hall. All the 
holy forces are sustained and revived by it, and all are dependant on it. 



The Donkey Driver 


243 


The Zohar speaks of Rosh de Atik, where all the degrees and all the Light 
of all the worlds are concentrated and concealed. It further explains how this 
Zivug can occur up to the final correction, so it would combine all the degrees 
emerging one after another during the 6,000 years. And it would emerge instantly 
during the 6,000 years of the world’s existence, when the degrees are in a state of 
constant ascents and descents, for as soon as a new degree, a new attainment of 
the Creator, of the Light, is revealed, the present degree disappears. This occurs 
due to the sin of the lower ones, who cannot retain this degree permanently 
(world— Olam, from the word Haalamah— concealment. The complete revelation 
of the Creator to His Creatures will take place at the end of the 6,000 years; 
thus, the world-concealment will cease to exist). 

So, whenever a degree disappears, it does so only from the sensation of one 
who attains a new degree. In reality, this degree ascends to Rosh de At ik and hides 
there, so as to, by joining other degrees, be manifested at the end of correction. 

In the same way, At ik gathers all the degrees revealed in the world during 
the 6,000 years, and conceals them within itself until the time of the end of 
correction comes; WHEN IT CORRECTS THE LAST PORTION OF WHAT 
IT MUST CORRECT, AND THUS CANNOT NO LONGER SIN. AND IT 
NO LONGER NEEDS TO SIN TO CORRECT THE NEXT PORTION OF 
EGOISM; HENCE, THIS FINAL DEGREE REMAINS PERMANENTLY 
AND DOES NOT DISAPPEAR. Then, At ik gathers all the degrees, and they all 
manifest simultaneously. 

Everyone has his own Partzuf Atik. How can one accelerate his advancement 
along the degrees of correction in this world and in the spiritual worlds? It is 
written in the Talmud that an old man bends as he walks, as if he’s looking for 
something that he had lost. 

An old man symbolizes someone of wisdom, Hochma, for even without having 
lost anything, he looks beforehand for things he can correct in himself, and thus 
finds them. Hence, he does not require the previous degree of attainment to 
disappear from him. And if one does not discover new egoistic properties in 
need of correction within him, his previous degree disappears and a new one 
begins. However, this process is considerably slower than when one acts like an 
old man in search of shortcomings. 

Throughout the 6,000 years, Atik is defined as unattainable. Therefore, its 
head is called RADLA (an abbreviation for the Aramaic words, Reisha de Lo 
Etiada, the “unattainable head”), whereas the name Atik is derived from the 
word Ne’etak (isolated) from the lower ones, for it does not shine upon them. 




244 


The Zohar 


And, although it accumulates within all the Lights that emerge from it itself and 
become revealed in the lower worlds, the Light of the end of correction remains 
concealed nonetheless. It follows that after each degree disappears due to the 
sins of the lower ones, it ascends to Rosh de Atik and conceals itself there. 

However, Guf de Atik, from its Peh downward, is located inside all the other 
Partzufim of the world of Atzilut, i.e., it is attainable by them. Thus, by clothing 
in the Partzufim of the world of Atzilut, Atik shines through them and gives the 
Light to them and to all the lower worlds of BYA. And any Light that shines on 
creation during the 6,000 years comes only from Gufde Atik, and not from some 
other spiritual object. 

We usually say that whatever is present in the Rosh of a Partzuf manifests in 
its Guf. This is also true with regard to all the Partzufim of the world of AK and 
all the other Partzufim in all the worlds, except in Partzuf Atik! This is so because 
Atik remains in Tzimtzum Aleph and descends down to our world. However, with 
regard to other Partzufim below it, Atik acts as though it is in Tzimtzum Bet, making 
a special Zivug on itself and the Light from it descends to the lower worlds. 

The Light that comes to revive the worlds is called “sustenance” or Ohr 
Hassadim, and the Light that comes to stimulate the growth of the Partzufim, 
to turn a small Partzuf (Katnut) into a big one (Gadlut) is called Ohr Hochma. 
Both these Lights originate in Guf de Atik. Ohr Hochma, which makes a Partzuf 
big, is called the Light that elevates the Partzuf, for the lying position is called 
Ihur (embryo), the sitting position is called Katnut (small), and the standing 
position—Gadlut (big). 

94. He slew two—Ariel and Moav (Moab). Two Holy Temples existed thanks 
to Atik and received from it: the First Temple and the Second Temple. Since 
Atik’s disappearance, the process that stemmed from Above had ceased. It is 
as though he struck and destroyed them. 

Only Malchut de Malchut must be corrected, and nothing else. All the other 
properties do not require correction. This Malchut de Malchut is Malchut of Olam 
Ein So/ (the World of Infinity), Behina Dalet, Nukva de ZA or Partzuf BON—the 
Creator’s only creation, the will to receive (pleasure) for oneself. It is this desire 
that caused the breaking of the Kelim (vessels)—the sin of Adam. 

And all the work of the righteous during the 6,000 years concerns the 
correction of Malchut, so she becomes precisely as she was prior to the breaking 
of the Kelim and the sin of Adam. As a result, the great Zivug on Tzimtzum Aleph 
in Rosh de Atik will be revealed. The Light of this Zivug enables man to sort and 
separate his impure desires from the pure ones, and thus forever rid himself of 



The Donkey Driver 


245 


the impure egoistic forces. This is exactly what Prophet Yeshayahu writes about: 
“He will eradicate death forever” ( Yeshayahu, 25:8). 

Since Malchut, Partzuf BON of the world of Atzilut, is completely corrected 
already and does not require any further corrections, her Partzuf BON ascends 
to the level of Partzuf SAG of the world of A K. Thus, Malchut completely attains 
the properties of Bina. 

However, meanwhile, after the great Zivug in Atik, but before the ascent of 
Partzuf BON to SAG, the Light of At ik stops shining. As a result, the two Temples 
were destroyed. The two temples are the two Lights of Hochma: the Light of AVI, 
Ohr Hochma de Haya that shines in the First Temple, and the Light of YESHSUT, 
Ohr Neshama that shines in the Second Temple. And all the Light that Israel 
received from Atik disappears. 

However, all these destructions and disappearances of Light are corrections 
and milestones on the path to deliverance and complete correction. They signify 
not devastation, but creation of perfection, as they are precisely those final 
corrections that bring BON back to SAG. 

Since all the roots and sources of what transpires in this world exist in the 
spiritual realm, and must all manifest once in our world, every spiritual root 
must “touch” its branch in our world, and it does not matter when this occurs. 
In the spiritual world, everything unfolds in accordance with a strict cause-and- 
effect process, whereas in our world those same consequences can manifest at a 
completely different time. 

An example of this is the destruction of the First and the Second Temples. 
While this event has already transpired in our world, in the spiritual world it 
occurs only when the last stage of correction is attained. Due to the complexity 
of time-transcending notions, we will examine this matter in another book. 
However, one way or another, only our inner spiritual properties can become the 
Temple in which we will feel the Creator and in which He will forever dwell! 

At the end of correction, Ohr Haya and Ohr Neshama will be called the 
First and the Second Temples, respectively. Also, until the end of correction, 
Ohr Haya, which is received on the Zivug of Malchut and included in Yesod, is 
called Shabbat (Sabbath), while Ohr Neshama is called Hoi (weekdays). As we 
can see, there is absolutely no connection between these Lights and the days 
of the week in our world. 

After the destruction of the spiritual Temples (the disappearance of Light), 
they will be recreated from Above by the screen of Bina, called “Heaven.” This is 
because the screen of Partzuf SAG is a property of absolute mercy and is completely 




246 


The Zohar 


unrestricted in its actions, desiring only to bestow and refrain from receiving Ohr 
Hochma. Thus, it is beyond the influence of any restrictions and limitations. 

As a result of this Z ivug, the two Temples will be restored forever, and “the 
Light of the Moon (Malchut) shall be as the Light of the Sun ( Bina )” (Yeshayahu, 
30:26). The Light of Bina, which is now the Light of ZA (called “the sun”), 
will be seven times more powerful, as ZAT de Atik. From there, this Light will 
descend to AVI and create the first seven days of creation, for ZA (the sun) will 
become like AB and contain the Light of Guf de At ik. Malchut will become like 
ZA and receive his Light, the Light of the sun. 

At the end of correction, a Z ivug on Malchut herself (the primordial, but 
corrected egoism) will transpire, and all the particular Z ivugim that were made 
on all the Lights through the 6,000 years (made not on Malchut, but on her 
inclusion in Yesod) will thereby disappear. 

The Temple will be restored from Heaven, for Bina herself does not wish to 
receive O hr Hochma. And it will not occur because she cannot, but because she 
does not want to. This degree is referred to as “in the hands of Heaven.” For 
example, it is written in the blessing on the new moon: “Life, which contains 
the fear of Heaven, and the fear of sinning.” This life is above our reasoning and 
desires, for it is said that faith must be “above reason”; otherwise, sins will ensue. 

Thus, one desires nothing more than to go by faith above his reason and 
desires, for he is afraid to sin. However, there exists an even Higher Degree: when 
he no longer fears sinning, as he now has a screen, but still prefers to proceed by 
faith above reason and desires, for he yearns to be dissolved in the Upper One. 

The reason for the Light’s disappearance from Guf de At ik prior to these 
corrections is that the two Malchuyot (Bina and Malchut, called SAG and BON) 
no longer exist. After the great Z ivug of Atik, BON were annulled along with 
the screen of SAG, as Guf de Atik contains the connection between Bina and 
Malchut, designed for their interaction during the 6,000 years. 

As a result of such interaction between Bina and Malchut, an opportunity 
arises to partially, gradually correct Malchut. In this mutual Z ivug with Malchut, 
which is merged with Bina ( Bina’s properties), Atik first creates AA and then all 
the other Partzufim of the worlds of Atzilut and BYA. 

And since the screen of Malchut (Masach de BON) now disappears, the 
screen of Bina (Masach de SAG) disappears as well, as they are merged together. 
In the absence of Malchut and the screen, this Z ivug stops, and all the Light of 
Guf de Atik emanating from this Z ivug on the mutual screen of Malchut and 



The Donkey Driver 


247 


Bina disappears. Therefore, all the Light that descended from its Guf (called 
Temples) disappeared. 

In Rosh de Atik there is a Z ivug on Malchut of Tzimtzum Aleph. Merged with 
Bina and existing for 6,000 years, the screen of Malchut disappears. As a result, 
the Light disappears as well. Malchut has yet to ascend to SAG to receive her 
perfection, as there is still no new Light. This complete absence of Light is called 
“destruction.” However, Malchut then receives the Light of AVI, and the worlds 
of BYA merge with the world of Atzilut. 

95. And the Holy Throne ( Malchut ) is overthrown. Hence, the prophet 
Yechezkel (Ezekiel) wrote, “I am in exile,” signifying that the degree called 
“I,” which is Malchut, is in exile. Why? “By the river Kevar.” Kevar 
(already) is the river that had already existed, but has now disappeared. As it 
is written, “The river is destroyed and dried up.” It was “destroyed” in the 
first Temple and “dried up” in the second. Hence, it is written: “He struck 
and destroyed both, Ariel and Moav.” Moav (or Mi An) means “from the 
Heavenly Father.” They were all destroyed for Him, and all the Light that 
shone upon Israel disappeared. 

The word Kursa, derived from the word Kisse (throne) or Kissuy (cover) 
signifies the combination of the properties of Malchut and Bina, which leads 
to die Light descending to BYA during die 6,000 years. The Holy Throne is 
overthrown, because the screen of Bina (Kisse) has been annulled, as it is said, “I 
am in exile,” where “I” designates Malchut. 

The entire spiritual complex is structured like a ladder, where Malchut of 
the Upper Partzuf becomes (descends to) the Keter of the lower one. This is also 
indicated in the names: Malchut is called “I” (Ani = Aleph-Nun-Yod) and Keter is 
called “no” ( Ein = Aleph-Yod-Nun), as it is completely unattainable. Only that 
which is perceived within Malchut can be attained; hence, it is called “I.” 

Only Malchut of the Upper Partzuf acts as a link between the Partzufim: the 
Upper One makes a Z ivug on its Malchut, creates Ohr Hozer, and receives (clothes) 
the Upper Light within it, and then Malchut of the Upper One descends to the 
lower Partzuf in the form of Ohr Hozer. This state of the Upper One clothing in 
the lower one is called the exile of the Upper One, for the Z ivug with the Upper 
Light disappears from it, and the Upper Light disappears from all the Partzufim. 
And the river dries up—the corrected screen is called the “river,” for it causes the 
Upper Light’s descent to the lower ones. 

However, now that the screen (river) disappears, the descent of the Upper 
Light disappears as well. The destruction of the river in the First Temple causes 



248 


The Zohar 


the disappearance of Ohr Haya; the river in the Second Temple dries up, and 
Ohr Neshama vanishes along with it. The river in the First Temple is destroyed 
because the Z ivug in AVI is stopped; the Light in YESHSUT is exhausted, and 
the river in the Second Temple dries up. 

The source of Ohr Haya and Neshama is Aba, called the “Heavenly Father,” for 
he shines in ZA, called “Heaven,” with the Light that elevates ZON to YESHSUT 
(the Second Temple) and to AVI (the First Temple). Because the Light stops 
shining from Guf de Atik, all of the Light descending to Israel disappears. This 
refers not only to the Light of the two Temples, but to all of the Light shining 
upon Israel, including Ohr VAK and the Light in the worlds of BYA. 

96. Further, He descended and struck the lion. Initially, when this river 
rolled its waters down, Israel was in a state of perfection, for they offered 
up gifts and sacrifices to atone for their sins and to save their souls. Then, the 
image of a lion would descend from Above, and they would see it on the 
altar as it trampled the bodies of the sacrifices, devouring them, and all the 
dogs (all those who slander Israel) would fall to silence. 

The fire that consumes the sacrifices laid on the Temple altar resembled 
a lion, and towered over the sacrifices, like a lion (Talmud, Yoma, 21:2), and 
that fire burned the sacrifices laid down by the sons of Israel. However, this is a 
corporeal image that a regular person perceives in our world. 

But we shall follow our higher analysis and detach ourselves from this 
corporeal image; we will explain the action in the spiritual world that this 
language actually alludes to. All the languages in the Torah, including that which 
describes a rather corporeal image of sacrifice, speak only of spiritual actions. 
The most precise language for the description of these actions is the language of 
Kabbalah. However, this language is clear only to those who have ascended to 
the spiritual worlds and see both the roots, i.e., the events that transpire in the 
spiritual worlds, as well as their corporeal consequences. 

Before the Light of Atik disappeared, when the Upper Light still shone upon 
Israel, like a river rolling its waters, Israel was in a state of perfection: by means 
of sacrifice, it raised its MAN (request), thus evoking a Z ivug on its screen, and 
MAD (the Light, abundance) descends on it. As a result of these actions, it grew 
closer to the Heavenly Father, and all the impure forces distanced from it, for it 
purified its souls, and purification signifies distancing from the impure forces 
(desires), the way a soiled garment is cleansed from dirt. 

Hence, the Hebrew word for sacrifice is Korban, derived from the word 
Karov (near). Thus, sacrifice signifies a person tearing away a part of his inner 



The Donkey Driver 


249 


animal egoism for the sake of drawing closer to the Creator. This is what brings 
Israel closer to their Heavenly Father. 

And since Israel existed in perfection and raised MAN for the Creator’s 
pleasure alone, its MAN would ascend to Bina. The Light of Bina is called Ohr 
Hassadim, and its form resembles the image of a lion, like the property of bestowal, 
Hesed. This means that the lion-Bina receives Israel’s good desires and deeds. And 
it was seen how Bina consumes Israel’s MAN—Ohr Hassadim descends from Bina 
onto this MAN, like a lion trampling his prey (MAN) and devouring it. 

A lion devouring its prey is the principal aspect of sacrifice, for it signifies 
raising MAN to strengthen a screen and create Ohr Hozer. And since the 
magnitude of the received Ohr Yashar is determined by the magnitude (height) 
of Ohr Hozer, which creates the screen, it follows that existence and growth of 
Ohr Yashar is dependent on the Ohr Hozer. The greater the Ohr Hozer, the greater 
the descending Ohr Yashar becomes. 

In other words, to the extent that every one of us desires to “bestow,” he 
evokes a corresponding response from Above, from the root of his soul. And just 
as in our world a living being’s life and strength depend on nutrition (it simply dies 
without it), the Upper Light depends on the Light reflected by the screen. When it 
stops, the Upper Light disappears from the Partzuf, i.e., man stops feeling it. 

The Upper Light descends from Bina as Ohr Yashar (called a “lion”), i.e., in 
the form of “bestowal,” in accordance with Bina’s nature. And man sees (feels!) 
how Ohr Yashar clothes in Ohr Hozer, which ascends from its sacrifice (rejection 
of egoism), the lion’s nourishment. 

It devours its prey and thereby grows: the extent of Israel’s perfection and 
their ability to offer sacrifices, to “bestow,” determines the magnitude of their 
MAN and the force with which the Ohr Yashar strikes the screen, which reflects 
the Direct Light (pleasure) from below upwards with all its might. Moreover, it 
does so in great fear: for what if it fails to reflect the Light and desires to enjoy 
the Light of this commandment selfishly? 

That is precisely where one’s work lies. It is called “faith above reason,” for 
it must rise above one’s reason (egoism) and intellect. Conversely, those who 
receive inner confidence that it is enough to advance within one’s nature are 
called “sacred still,” a pure inanimate (non-developing) being, as such reason 
prevents them from spiritual growth. 

Therefore, if the height of Ohr Hozer is great, it is defined as a lion that tears 
and devours its prey, as a victor, for it grows and ascends to a higher spiritual 
level thanks to the efforts of the lower one (man). 




250 


The Zohar 


The impure force, the selfish will to receive pleasure is called “a dog,” as it 
is written: “The leech has two daughters (who demand): Give-give.” ( Mishley, 
30:15). They bark like a dog, and demand (to receive) both this world and the 
next. And the Higher One ascends, the stronger this impure force, called Klipa, 
becomes. And its strongest part corresponds to Ohr Yechida, opposite the lion 
devouring its prey). 

The lion represents mercy and bestowal, unwillingness to receive anything 
for oneself. As it is written in The Ethics of the Fathers, 95: “A Chassid, the merciful 
righteous one, says, ‘What’s yours is yours, and what’s mine is yours,”’ so is the 
impure force (dog) aimed wholly at reception, and has no aspiration to bestow. 
As it is said in the Talmud (Bava Batra, 10:2), “The righteous among the nations 
of the world: all their mercy is for themselves alone;” hence, they are connected 
to the impure force of a dog. (Under no circumstances should any of this be 
interpreted literally, for, as it was repeatedly explained, the whole of the Kabbalah 
speaks only of man’s-prototype. Israel is one’s inner aspiration to the Creator, 
and Goy (a gentile) signifies egoism (regardless of and unrelated to one’s origin). 
Relate this to the above-mentioned corporeal and spiritual Temples, where there 
is no connection between rocks and spiritual objects. It is also unclear to the 
uninitiated why altruism is the property of a lion, while a dog, a loyal animal, is 
the root of egoism and impurity). 

It is therefore said that when Israel was perfect, it acquired the property of a 
lion, and all the dogs left it be, for it gave Malchut the strength to raise Ohr Hozer 
to great heights (devoured its prey, like a victor), and the impure force, like a 
dog, was afraid to come near it, and would hide in fear of the lion. 

97. Yet, when sins increased, he descended to the lower degrees and slew the 
lion. This was because the lion refused to give up its prey as before, and this 
is as though he killed it. Therefore, he struck the lion and threw it into a pit, 
to the Evil Side (according to his understanding). The Evil Side saw this and 
sent a dog to devour the sacrifices from the altar in the lion’s stead. What is 
the name of that lion? And what is the nickname of that dog? Baladan is its 
name; Baladan is formed by the words BaTAdarn, where the letter Mem is 
replaced by Nitn, for he is not a human being at all, but a dog, and his face is 
like a muzzle of a dog. 

(“He” refers to Benayahu Ben Yehoyada Ben Ish Chai, Rav Paalim u Mekabtziel, 
in whom the degree of At ik, all of the Light, shines all at once.) Due to the 
disappearance of the screens of Malchut (BON) and Biria (SAG), Israel below could 
no longer raise MAN (the will to “bestow,” the screen, the lion’s nourishment). 
The Zivug stopped, and the Upper Light (lion) disappeared in its Root Above. 



The Donkey Driver 


251 


“Threw it into a pit”—the root of the desire to receive for one’s own sake 
is in the eyes, as Rashi said: “The eye sees, and the heart burns with desire” 
(The weekly portion Shlach). This will to receive for oneself is called an “empty, 
waterless pit” {Bereshee t, 37:24). The Upper Light does not fill it. Although it is 
empty, it is unworthy of being a vessel for the Light, as it is written: “He and I 
cannot dwell in the same abode” (Talmud, Suta, 5). 

Thus, the lion was thrown into a pit, for it was struck before the eyes of 
the impure egoistic force, called an “empty, waterless pit.” And these pits now 
emerge from their hideouts and reveal their power, and in place of a lion appears 
a barking dog. 

ZA-MA = 45 is called Adam = Aleph + Dalet + Mem = 1 + 4 + 40 = 45, when 
he receives the Light from Bina. The property of Bina is bestowal. Hence, it is 
written: “Man is your name” (Talmud, Yevamot, 61), referring only to those who 
attain the property of bestowal, but not to the others, of whom it is said: “Even 
their mercy is only for their profit” (Talmud, Bava Batra, 10:2), and who are 
therefore called Baladan (Bal-Adan). 

98. On a day of snow, on the day misfortunes descend from the Supernal 
Court Above, it is written, “Her household shall not fear snow,” that is, the 
Supernal Court, called “snow.” For her household is clothed twofold, and can 
thereby endure a strong fire. So the book says. 

Strictness, judgment (Din) or restriction imposed on the use of egoism in the 
male part is called “snow” that stems from the Supernal Court. These restrictions 
are very powerful, but are mitigated below the Chazeh, where Malchut receives 
them. Nukva describes these restrictions in the following way: “Surround me 
with roses,” (SKir HaShirim, 2) referring to two fires: the Upper— Bina, and the 
lower, her own— Malchut. 

After Malchut acquires these two fires, she weakens the strictness of the cold 
snow with her fire. Hence, it is written in Shir HaShirim (Song of Songs) that 
her household shall not fear snow (the Supernal Court), i.e., the restrictions 
imposed on the male part, for her household is clothed twofold. In other words, 
on the contrary, the snow helps her withstand the heat of her fire. And only 
now that the screen and Zivug are gone, and the two fires are no more, the 
restrictions of the snow return. 

99. What is written next? “And he struck an Egyptian.” This refers to a secret: 
every time Israel sinned, the Creator would conceal Himself and restrict them 
from receiving all the goodness and all the Light that He shone upon them. 
“He struck an Egyptian.” “He” refers to Moshe, the Light that shines upon 
Israel. For in Egypt he was born, grew up, and attained the Supernal Light. 



252 


The Zohar 


The Torah speaks not of man, but of the Light that disappeared and 
concealed itself. Hence, it is defined as “slain.” Gone is the great Light, with 
which Moshe shone upon Israel. And this Light is called the “Egyptian,” for 
in Egypt Moshe was born, grew up, and attained the great Supernal Light, the 
Light that delivered Israel from Egypt. 

100. A man of mirror. It is written, mirror and man, as it is written, a Godly 
man, the husband of that mirror, of the Creator’s glory, M alchut. For with 
this degree he merited ruling over the entire land in all of his desire—a feat 
unmatched by any other. 

The difference between Moshe and the other prophets is that Moshe is the 
foundation of ZA, as he constructs and passes the Light from ZA to Malchut, 
whereas the other prophets are the foundation of Malchut, and receive from 
her. Hence, it is written of him: “Godly man,” the husband of Malchut, called 
the “Creator’s greatness.” And why is Moshe called the husband of Malchut ? 
Because he attained the level of ZA and gives the Light to Malchut. Therefore, it 
is written that his attainments are beyond anyone else’s, for the other prophets 
receive from Malchut, and are therefore ruled by her. 

He who attains Malchut receives from her. The degree called Moshe means 
that he who attains it gives the Light to Malchut, instead of receiving from her. 
Yet, how can this be? How can one possibly rise above Malchut if all our souls 
originate from her and exist in the worlds of BYA? This indicates the state of 
ascent above Malchut, which is how Moshe ascends to Bina. 

101. This is the Creator’s staff that was delivered to him, as it is written, 
“With the Creator’s staff in my hand.” This is the staff that was created on 
the evening of the sixth day of the creation, before Shabbat. And His Holy 
Name is contained in it. And with this staff Moshe sinned by striking it 
twice against the rock. The Creator said to him: “Moshe, it is not for this 
purpose that I have not given you My staff; thus, it will no longer be in your 
possession henceforth.” 

The words “evening” and “twilight” signify the state of mitigation ofMalchut’s 
strictness by the properties of Bina to an extent that it becomes impossible to 
distinguish Malchut from Bina. This is because on Shabbat, Malchut ascends to 
AVI and becomes Bina. However, on the twilight of Shabbat, Malchut is not 
yet Bina, but is no longer Malchut (everything in the book speaks only of the 
properties of spiritual objects, for nothing but desires exists in the spiritual 
worlds. Only in our world are desires clothed in physical bodies). 



The Donkey Driver 


253 


Hence, it is said that ten things were created in the twilight, when there is no 
distinction between the thing itself and its origin, Bina or Malchut, for Malchut 
herself shows no distinction. And such is the property of the staff that was created 
in the twilight, before the world’s first Shabbat. Hence, it possesses the holy (special) 
property of the Creator’s name, an allusion to the properties of Bina, from which 
holiness (altruism) descends. And Malchut is ready to receive this holiness. 

And these two properties of Bina and Malchut are contained in the Creator’s 
staff, utterly indistinguishable from one another, for they were created in the 
twilight. Hence, with the help of this staff, i.e., by means of the property of 
uniting Malchut with Bina, all the fortunes and wonders, all of the Light can be 
brought to Israel, for this is the purpose behind the Light’s descent from Bina 
to Malchut. With the help of this property (the staff), Moshe merited an ascent 
to Bina, up to the degree of “Godly man.” Therefore, the staff is called the 
Creator’s staff, according to the name of Bina. 

Malchut is called Tzur (rock), and upon ascending to Bina, she is called Sela 
(another name for a rock). The inner Zivug between ZON (ZA and Malchut) in 
the state of their ascent to AVI, when Nukva uses lma’s Kelim, is called “speech.” 
The outer Zivug between ZON, when they are in their own place, is called “Zivug 
de Hakaa” (a Zivug by Striking). 

It is hence written to Moshe in the weekly Torah portion Bashalach: “You 
shall strike the rock (T zur), and it shall bring forth water” (Shemot, 17:6), for 
a Zivug de Hakaa occurs within Malchut herself. However, it is written in the 
weekly portion Chukat: “Speak ye unto the rock before all eyes, that it give forth 
its water” ( Bamidbar, 20:8), for the “rock” is in Bina, and the Zivug within her is 
called “speech.” 

And herein lies the sin of Moshe: he struck twice: in addition to first 
striking the T \ur, he struck the Sela, which lacks the strike, and only has a 
Zivug in the form of speech. Since there is no distinction in the Creator’s staff, 
and it is unclear whether it refers to Malchut or to Bina, he also applied it to 
Sela-Bina. And the Creator told him that the staff was given to him to use with 
7 \ur, but not with Sela. 

102. At once He descended to him in strictness and wrenched the staff from 
the Egyptian’s hand, for the moment the staff was taken from him, it was 
taken for good. And he was killed by it: because of the sin of striking the rock 
with the staff, he died and did not enter the Holy Land. And that Light was 
concealed from Israel. 



254 


The Zohar 


It was already mentioned in item 94 that as a result of a great Zivug in 
At ik, only BON were supposed to disappear, but not SAG, for BON could have 
immediately risen and forever become like SAG. However, as SAG and BON 
were merged, SAG disappeared together with BON. 

The Light of Moshe disappeared from Israel for the same reason—because 
he committed an even greater sin and harmed the union of BON and SAG by 
striking the Sela. Hence, harsh judgment descended upon him, which refers to 
the disappearance of the Light of SAG. Indeed, SAG is no longer connected to 
BON in any way, and the annulment of BON has no influence on it. 

This is the meaning of what is written in Psalms: “He resembled those who 
draw axes at a copse of trees, but now all of his adornments are smashed by 
hatchets and axes” (Tehilim, 74:5). Due to Malchut’s ascent to Bina, and her 
correction there, Malchut is like a “copse of trees,” for SAG, too, is annulled by 
the merging with BON, Malchut’s ascent, as if struck with “hatchets and axes.” 

Hence, it is written that the staff was taken from the Egyptian, and will 
never return to him, for the staff refers to Malchut. So the Light disappears for 
good, because BON renews itself afterwards and becomes SAG forever. Thus, it 
is no longer necessary to use the staff for striking. 

It is written in this regard that he was slain by the same staff, for had he 
been careful and used it only once—striking the Tzur, but not the Sela—SAG 
would not have been annulled together with BON, and he would not have died. 
Instead, he would have immediately risen to SAG. 

This is why it is written that Moshe shall not enter the Holy Land, Israel, as 
Israel is BON in the state of ascent to SAG, and it is called the Holy Land, for 
the Light of Bina (called the Holy Light) shines in it. However, until the end of 
correction arrives, there are still ascents and descents, which cause destructions 
(disappearance of the Light) and revelations (shining of the Light). But at the 
end of correction, BON will remain within SAG permanently as Eretz Israel, and 
there shall be no more exiles from it. 

103. “The most respected of the thirty” refers to the Upper One that receives 
from Above and passes downward, one that receives and brings closer. 
However, he does not go to the first three, but they come to him and give to 
him wholeheartedly, but he does not come to them. 

GAR (HBD ) are called “thirty,” as each of the three Sefirot HBD consists of 
ten, which amounts to thirty. And their Light shines in all of the 6,000 years. 
The soul of Benayahu appears out of the great Zivug of At ik, which accumulates 



The Donkey Driver 


255 


all the Zivugim during the 6,000 years. Hence, it is called Rav Paalim (performing 
many actions) and M ekabtziel (gathering all into one degree-Partzu/, called 
Benayahu Ben Yehoyada). 

Therefore, he receives the Light of all of the Supernal Thirty, which descends 
to his soul. Indeed, he consists of particular Zivugim that have transpired through 
the 6,000 years, which he gathers into one. And, although they give him the 
best of their properties wholeheartedly, he still cannot draw closer to them and 
subsequently receive from them. This is because the disappearance of the screen 
in ZON made the screen in SAG disappear as well. Hence, he cannot come to 
them, raise MAN, and receive from them further. 

104. Despite not being considered one of them, David heard the meaning 
that is never detached from the heart, for they can never be separated. David 
paid attention with all his heart, but he did not pay attention to David. For by 
the praises, hymns, and mercy that the moon offers the sun, the moon draws 
the sun closer so as to be with it. 

David is Malchut; Malchut comes from the word Melech (King). Therefore, 
David is King, for his properties are the properties of Malchut (kingdom). 
And this is the fourth leg (support) of GAR. Hence, it is written that although 
he cannot be together with the thirty (GAR), he nonetheless clings to these 
properties, and never detaches himself from them. 

This is because Malchut’s entire perfection is revealed in him, for it stems 
from the great Zivug of At ik, which destroys all the impure forces of BON, as it is 
said: “He destroys evil forever.” 

Therefore, David resolved to never part with it again, for it is his perfection. 
However, Benayahu Ben Yehoyada paid no attention to David, as David is the 
fourth support of GAR. Hence, it is as though he is unable to receive from GAR. 
And since he cannot receive from David, he pays no attention to him. 

With the help of the MAN of Malchut (called Se’ara— stormy wind), which 
is raised to ZA (called “Heaven”), as a result of the hymns, praises, and mercy, 
Malchut receives the Light of Benayahu Ben Yehoyada’s soul, which is absolute 
perfection, and merges with it for all eternity. 

105. Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba fell down on their faces before him and could 
not see him anymore, then rose and went in every direction, but could not 
see him. They sat and wept, and could not even speak to one another. Then, 
Rabbi Aba said, “It is true what we have learned, that the Torah accompanies 
the righteous on all their paths. The righteous of the other world come to 



256 


The Zohar 


them to reveal to them the secrets of the Torah. And this must have been 
Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba, who came to us from the other world to reveal these 
secrets to us. But before we could recognize him, he vanished.” They rose and 
wanted to lead their donkeys on, but could not. They repeatedly tried to goad 
the donkeys, but still they could not move. They grew frightened and left their 
donkeys behind. And to this day this place is called “the place of donkeys.” 

Because they could not bear such a powerful Light, which was revealed to 
them upon the disclosure of those secrets, they fell ( Katnut ) and then rose (Gadlut), 
for it was so unbearable. After they merited receiving from it such a great degree, 
this Light disappeared at once and did not reappear, and they could not attain it 
anymore. Hence, they wept (a kind of Katnut) out of great grief that they had lost 
such exalted attainment, and they could not speak (absence of Kelim). 

The bitterness of their loss made them realize that it was the degree of 
Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba himself, and not lower, as they had mistakenly thought 
before. The forces that they received from the soul of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba are 
called “donkeys,” with which they can raise MAN, the request to attain Higher 
Degrees, Haya and Yechida. 

In other words, the soul is a spiritual force of Light; like a pulling force of 
a donkey that helps overcome egoistic desires and move from place to place in 
the spiritual world, onto a Higher Degree. To raise MAN means to feel what is 
lacking and what needs to be attained—this is what man’s work is all about. 

Such is the work of a righteous soul—it helps man by lifting him up onto 
his donkey (egoism) and taking the lead (pulling) in order to illuminate (give 
strength) for him the path of the righteous. And now, when its role has been 
completed, this soul disappears, although they would have very much liked to 
continue ascending and riding its donkeys, i.e., they wished to raise MAN anew 
to return and attain once more. 

However, they could no longer receive the strength to raise MAN. Thus, 
they were struck by fear and left their donkeys in that place, which is hence 
called “the place of donkeys,” for they could not use them any longer. 

106. Rabbi Elazar opened and said: “Oh, how great is Your goodness, which 
You have hidden away for those who fear You! (Tehilim, 31:20). How infinite 
is the goodness that the Creator shall bestow on humankind in the future, 
on those sin-fearing, exalted righteous, who study the Torah as they arrive 
at that Upper World.” 

The words “great goodness” refer to Gadlut, the attainment of the Light of 
GAR. For the basis of a Partzuf is its VAR—the amount of Light necessary for its 




The Donkey Driver 


257 


existence, received from the Zivug of AVI, who make this Zivug and emit Ohr 
Hassadim, necessary to sustain the worlds. And all the extra Light, necessary 
for existence, is called GAR or Ohr Hochma— the additional, delectable and 
great Light. 

This Ohr Hochma, the Light of GAR, stems from Bina, which is called “the 
world to come.” It is clothed in Ohr Hassadim that emerges from a Zivug of the 
Sefira Yesod (Chai Olamim— life of the worlds), and from there descends to the 
righteous who fear to sin. 

The Zivug of AVI, when they are at the degree of Bina, gives Ohr Hassadim 
to ZA for the sustenance of the worlds. However, when AVI ascend to AA and 
beget new souls by their Zivug, their Zivug is inconstant, as it emits Ohr Hochma, 
called “new souls.” 

107. The name “great goodness” can be further described as containing all 
the secrets of the Supernal wisdom, which descend from ZA to Malchut. 
There is a great tree, called ZA or Rav (great, strong), and there is a small tree, 
Malchut, which grows from it. And it is elevated to the Highest Firmament. 

In addition to the attainment of the Light of GAR, there is also the inner 
part of the Supernal wisdom with its secrets, which become revealed in the 
Zivug of A tile at the completion of the 6,000 years, the end of correction. MA 
designates the lower world, Malchut. The great and strong tree is ZA in the state 
of ascent to Partzuf AB, as in this state he receives Ohr Hochma, and Hochma 
signifies strength (not “reason—strength” but the strength of Ohr Hochma lies in 
the fact that it allows one to go against reason, in defiance of common sense, in 
faith above reason). 

However, when ZA is in his place, he is simply called “a tree,” for he lacks 
Ohr Hochma and has only VAK, Ohr Hassadim. Malchut is also called a tree and 
grows together with ZA; ZA ascends to Aba, to the utmost height, to the Supernal 
Firmament— Atik. 

108. The “great goodness” is the Light that was created on the first day of 
creation and concealed so as to be revealed in the future for the righteous 
in the other world. Your Deeds are the Supernal Garden of Eden, which the 
Creator has created by His act. 

The Light that was created on the first day of creation is the Light in which 
Adam saw from one end of the world to the other. Hence, the word “Light” is 
used five times in the Torah’s description of the first day of creation. This Light is 
intended for the righteous in the world to come, for it is concealed in Yesod de Aba 
and in Yesod de Ima, which are collectively called “righteousness and justice.” 



258 


The Zohar 


(In Hebrew, the words Tzedek— justice and Tzadik— righteous/just have the 
same root. This name is given to one who attains the Creator’s governance and 
sees that His governance is just; hence, he justifies all of the Creator’s actions, 
and is thus called righteous. The other meaning of the word ‘righteous’ refers to 
man’s belief that the Creator is righteous, because in spirituality, one assumes the 
name of the degree one has attained. If he attains that the Creator is righteous 
by receiving this knowledge from the degree onto which he ascends, then he is 
already called by the name of that degree.) 

O hr Hochma can be received only in “precious garments,” called 
righteousness and justice, that is, only with these intentions. The above excerpt 
speaks of an open action, implying unrestricted diffusion of Light, as it will 
be after the end of all the corrections. In the Torah, such a state is called “the 
Supernal Garden of Eden.” 

In the meantime, only the complete and perfect righteous ones, the souls 
of Benayahu Ben Yehoyada and others that merited reception of Light from the 
great Z ivug of Atik, gather all the Light of the 6,000 years. These souls’ place of 
rest is referred to as the Garden of Eden. 

There exists the lower Garden of Eden of earth, which is VAK, and the 
Supernal one, GAR. All the souls dwell in the lower Garden of Eden, and only 
on new moons and Sabbaths do they ascend to the Supernal Garden of Eden, 
and then return to their place. However, there are individual, special persons 
(souls), whose place is in the Supernal Garden of Eden. These are the souls of 
which Rabbi Shimon says: “I saw them ascending, but their numbers were few.” 

109. All the righteous stand in the lower Garden of Eden, clothed in precious 
adornments, similar in quality and form to those which they wore in this 
world, meaning in the same form as people in this world and according to 
man’s actions in this world. They stand there and fly away through the air, 
ascend to the Assembly in the Supernal Garden of Eden, fly there and bathe 
in the dew of the pure river of A pharsemon (persimmon), then come down 
and fly below in the lower Garden of Eden. 

The main difference between GAR and ZAT with regard to both Partzufim 
and souls is that GAR ( KHB ) do not need the garment of Hassadim. They can 
receive Ohr Hochma as it is. However, Partzufim of VAK and the souls born 
from ZON, whose basis is VAK ( Ohr Hochma clothed in Ohr Hassadim), can only 
receive Ohr Hochma when it is clothes in Ohr Hassadim. 

The Ruach de Tzadikim (spirit of the righteous) in the lower Garden of Eden 
is clothed in Ohr Hassadim, just as human souls in this world. And with the help 



The Donkey Driver 


259 


of these precious garments, they can ascend to the Supernal Garden of Eden 
and there receive O hr Hochma. Afterwards, they return to their place in the 
lower Garden of Eden, for that is their permanent place. 

They ascend by the power of Ohr Hassadim, called “air,” and fly to the 
Supernal Garden of Eden to receive Ohr Hochma, called the river of Apharsemon. 
However, they cannot stay there, so they immediately descend from the Supernal 
Garden of Eden to the lower. The Zohar compares them to human souls, for 
both the Upper and the lower human souls need to receive the garment of Ohr 
Hassadim in order to correct themselves and ascend. 

110. And sometimes these righteous appear as people in order to perform 
miracles, like celestial angels, just as we have seen the luminescence of the 
Upper Light, but did not merit to see and discover the wisdom’s great secrets. 

DID NOT MERIT TO DISCOVER THE WISDOM’S GREAT SECRETS- 
for the donkey driver had left them and disappeared. There are special souls 
that abide in the Supernal Garden of Eden. They have risen so high that the 
souls from the lower Garden of Eden ascend to them only on new moons 
and Sabbaths, and, being unable to stay there, immediately descend to their 
permanent place. However, they are nonetheless similar to human souls, which 
descend from the Supernal Garden of Eden to this world and meet people, just 
like the angels that seldom descend to this world. 

Now they have seen the Light of the Supernal Luminary, the Light of Rabbi 
Hamnuna-Saba that descended on them from the highest point, the Supernal 
Garden of Eden, and was revealed before them in this world (while they are still 
living in this world). 

AS PEOPLE refers to the souls that abide in the lower Garden of Eden, 
which have the form of people, and the Light of the Supernal Garden of Eden 
influences them. They can receive this Light during their ascent on new moons 
and Sabbaths, whereupon they merit meeting the souls of the Supernal Garden 
of Eden, and then descend to their permanent place. 

However, one may also say that the words AS PEOPLE refer to the people 
of our corporeal world, while the souls from the Supernal Garden of Eden 
sometimes descend to this world and, like exalted angels, appear before the eyes 
of the righteous. 

111. Rabbi Aba opened and said: “And he who is doomed said to his wife, 
‘We shall die, for I have seen the Creator.’ Even though he was not aware of 
his actions, as it is written, ‘He did not know that it was an angel’; however, 



260 


The Zohar 


since it is written, ‘Man shall not see Me and live,’ we know that he has 
died. And we have merited this great Light to accompany us, and the world 
exists because the Creator Himself sent him to us, to reveal the secrets of His 
Supernal wisdom to us. How joyous is our share!” 

When the angel saw him who was doomed, he did not yet have the proper 
level of attainment; thus, the angel was unwilling to reveal his name. Yet, 
although he did not know and did not attain him, he still feared the words, 
“Man shall not see Me and live” (Shemot, 33:20). 

But we have merited complete attainment, for we came to know his name, 
Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba. And we live and exist in this world. It is therefore clear 
that the degree of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba is called “Show me Your glory” (Shemot, 
33:18), Moshe’s request of the Creator. 

But the Creator replied: “You cannot see My face, for man shall not see Me 
and live.” From this we see that they have attained more than Moshe. This state 
is described by sages as, “There was no prophet more exalted than Moshe, but 
there was a sage” (Yalkut Shimoni, the end). It is also written: “A sage is preferred 
to a prophet” (Talmud, Bava Batra, 12:1). Thus, they have spiritually ascended to 
merit the appearance of such an exalted soul, while still being in this world. 

112. They walked and came to a mountain. The sun had set. The branches 
of the tree on that mountain started rattling and singing. As they were still 
walking, they heard a resounding voice proclaim, “Sons of the Holy Creator, 
dispersed among the living in this world, illuminated by the sons of the 
Assembly, gather in your places and rejoice with your Creator in the Torah.” 
They grew frightened and stopped, then sat down. 

“They came to a mountain” refers to the words of King David, who said 
( Tehilim , 24:3): “Who shall ascend the mountain of the Lord, and who shall 
stand in His holy place?” meaning who is worthy of it? After they climbed 
the mountain, the sun had set (the Light left the Partzuf). But they heard 
something from the trees, as it is written: “Then shall all the trees of the wood 
sing for joy” ( Tehilim , 96:12). 

They heard a voice that told them to return to their place, rejoice in the 
Creator and His Torah, and descend from the mountain. And it calls them by 
the name of that High Degree, which they’ve achieved. But it hints that people 
are not worthy of being at that degree and in this world simultaneously. Yet, 
although they were frightened, they remained on the mountain, sat down, and 
did not move. “Grew frightened,” “stopped,” and “sat down” are the spiritual 
states of the Partzuf. 



The Donkey Driver 


261 


We see how The Zohar explains the path of the righteous, those who cross 
the M achsom (the barrier that separates our world from the spiritual) and start 
ascending the rungs of the spiritual ladder. This path is diverse, and each book 
of the Torah describes it in its own way: the language of Kabbalah, legends, 
judicial laws, historical accounts of the Pentateuch, etc.. The Zohar draws a vivid 
picture for us—like a guidebook for those who will find themselves in the place 
of these exalted travelers in the spiritual world. Once there, you will see for 
yourselves what is implied by such notions as “mountain,” “tree,” and “voice.” 
Then The Zohar will become your true guidebook! 

It is impossible to provide a more detailed description of the Partzufim, i.e., 
an inner perception of one who ascends spiritually. This is because the reader 
must first have certain analogous sensations of his own. If one could see only 
once what the described content (or something similar) really means, one would 
be able to clearly imagine what it speaks of. 

It is the same in our world: even if we have never been to a certain country, 
we can imagine what others describe to us by analogy with what we already 
know. But in this case, there is no analogy. One who sees the spiritual world 
for the first time realizes how wrong all of his previous visualizations have been! 
Hence, we can say nothing about many of the states described in The Zohar. 

113. Meanwhile, a voice called out again, “O, mighty rocks, great hammers of 
thunder, Bind stands upon a pillar, so enter and assemble.” At that moment, 
they heard the mighty voice of thousands of trees, which was saying, “The 
Creator’s voice breaks the cedars.” Both Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba fell 
down on their faces. Great fear fell upon them. They rose hastily and left, not 
hearing anything else, then came down the mountain and kept on walking. 

It was previously said that they could not load their donkeys, meaning that 
they were unable to raise MAN, because Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba had already 
completed his helping mission. This is why they lost the power of their donkeys, 
and could not continue using them to raise MAN and merit Higher Degrees. 

Therefore, Rabbi Elazar said earlier that they did not merit seeing and 
attaining the secrets of the Supernal wisdom. The fact is that after they attained 
the level of Yechida, i.e., revealed the soul of Benayahu Ben Yehoyada with the 
help of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba, the disappearance of the screen (M asach) of BON 
caused the loss of M asach de SAG. Hence, they could no longer raise MAN. 

The Light stopped descending to them from Guf de Atik specifically to 
give them the opportunity, or rather the strength to recreate M asach de SAG. 



262 


The Zohar 


Consequently, BON will become like SAG, they will resume raising MAN, and 
will once more be able to ascend from degree to degree. 

Hence, as soon as both Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba left their donkeys, 
they lost strength to raise MAN in order to bring BON back to the level of SAG. 
However, the voice proclaimed that they are as strong as rock and thunder, for 
so far they have endured all the trials. And they will gather strength to endure 
the mighty rocks and to overcome all the obstacles as before, until they obliterate 
these obstacles, like great hammers of thunder crashing down from Above. 

Bina, though herself colorless, is called “the source of colors.” This is because 
she is all mercy, whereas all the other properties originate specifically from her 
by enduring all the trials, like rocks. From all this, Bina receives new forms, 
hence she received the powers of a new screen onto which emerge all the new 
degrees and Partzufim. 

Together with the voice that informed them of Bina’s new powers, they 
heard another voice, “The Creator’s voice breaks the cedars” (Tehilim, 29:5), 
which let them know that all the cedars (obstacles) on their path to higher 
attainments have been removed. This gave them strength to climb down the 
mountain and continue their path onto Higher Degrees. 

114. Upon reaching the house of Rabbi Yosi, the son of Rabbi Shimon 
Ben Yosi Ben Lakunya, they saw Rabbi Shimon BarYochai. They rejoiced. 
Rabbi Shimon rejoiced, too. He said to them, “You have traveled this path 
of Heavenly signs and wonders correctly, for as I was sleeping, I saw you and 
Benayahu Ben Yehoyada, who was sending you two crowns with an old man, 
so as to adorn you. I am certain that the Creator was on this path too, because 
I see how your faces have changed.” Rabbi Yosi said, “Truly, it is said that a 
sage is preferred to a prophet.” Rabbi Elazar came and put his head on the 
knees of his father, Rabbi Shimon, and told him of what had happened. 

Here The Zohar gives an allegorical explanation of two states: first, they merited 
attaining the Light of SAG (called Rabbi Yosi) once more, and secondly, now 
SAG and AB join in a constant Z ivug. We see this from their meeting with Rabbi 
Shimon, who signifies Ohr Hochma. In other words, they merited their BON 
returning and becoming like SAG in its constant and eternal Z ivug with AB. 

Benayahu Ben Yehoyada sent them two crowns through Rabbi Hamnuna- 
Saba: Ohr Yechida, called Benayahu Ben Yehoyada himself, and a new Light AB- 
SAG, which they have just attained. This Light also came to them by the powers 
of Benayahu Ben Yehoyada as a reward for overcoming all the trials, thanks to 



The Donkey Driver 


263 


which they, of all others, merited this degree, which is emanated from the great 
Light of his soul. 

Hence, it follows that he sent them two crowns. However, all these descents 
on their spiritual path were not failures; rather, the Creator Himself was 
leading them to that High Degree, which they have now attained. This is why 
it is written: I AM CERTAIN THAT THE CREATOR WAS ON THIS PATH 
(with you). However, HOW YOUR FACES HAVE CHANGED, for you have 
attained something else, described by the phrase, A SAGE IS PREFERRED 
TO A PROPHET. 

115. Rabbi Shimon was frightened and wept. He said, “I have heard the 
Creator and I am awed.” This verse was spoken by the prophet Havakuk 
(Habakkuk), when he saw his death and his resurrection by Elisha. Why was 
he named Havakuk? Because it is written that at around this time there would 
be a HOWEK-ET—a son will be embraced. For Havakuk was the son of the 
Shunamit. And there were two embraces: one from the mother and one from 
Elisha, as it is written, “He put his mouth to his.” 

First, it is unclear how the prophet Elisha could pass a seed in his blessing 
to the Shunamit, for this seed cannot exist (procreate). Indeed, Elisha was the 
greatest prophet after Moshe and his soul came from the Supernal Garden of 
Eden. Hence, his BON (in Hebrew, the words Ben— son and BON are spelled the 
same way: Bet-Nun) was already absolutely pure and perfect. 

Therefore, when he passed his son to her, he tied him to the male side, 
whereas he tied Havakuk only to the female side. And since the female side, 
Nukva, is closer to the impure force, it clung itself to him, and he died. Thus, 
the reason for his death lies in the exalted level of the prophet, for his BON is 
pure and free from the clinging of impure forces. 

Hence, the prophet prayed: “The Creator has hidden it from me and had not 
told me!” (M elachim II, 4:27). In other words, he had not the slightest clue that he 
could die by being connected only to BON. That is why it was necessary to return, 
revive, and attach him to the Upper World, to the resurrection of the dead. 

The essence of the embryo is the white (O hr Hochma) in it, as it is written 
(Talmud, Nidah, 31:1) that Aba (father) is Hochma, for Hochma is called 
“white,” as it is said, “He made everything with Hochma (wisdom)” (Tehilim, 
104). However, there is also a need for clothing in Ohr Hassadim, the intention 
“for the Creator’s sake,” as it is impossible to receive Ohr Hochma, the Light 
of Wisdom, attainment and delight, without the clothing of Ohr Hassadim, 
without an altruistic intention. 



264 


The Zohar 


So the mother must provide the red, the screen, which provides O hr 
Hassadim, required for the clothing of Ohr Hochma in it. As a result of the Ohr 
Hassadim embracing (clothing, enveloping) Ohr Hochma in itself, an embryo can 
exist. And here the embryo’s entire embrace came only from the mother, the 
Shunamit, i.e., only from the female side (BON). 

Hence, when Elisha revived him, he gave him the white (Hochma) and the 
red (Hassadim) once more. It follows that it was Elisha himself who embraced 
him the second time. It is hence said that there were two Havakuks (from the 
word Hibuk— embrace): one from the mother and the other from Elisha. 

116.1 have discovered in the book of King Solomon that the name Havakuk 
consists of seventy-two names. Elisha created it with words. Each word consists 
of three letters, for the letters of the alphabet that the Father confirmed to him 
initially flew away when he died. But Elisha embraced him and confirmed in 
him all these letters in his seventy-two names. In all, there are 216 letters in his 
seventy-two names, three letters in each. 

The embryo is built of 216 = RYU (Reish = 200 + Yod = 10 + Vav = 6) letters, 
designating Ohr Hochma, which descends to YESHSUT. This means that the 
embryo has RYU letters, which amounts to the Gematria of RE’IYAH = Reish - 
AlepUYod-Hey, i.e., the Light of vision. Re’iyah means vision in Hebrew, and 
vision is possible only in Ohr Hochma, for “seeing” means “attaining,” and the 
Light of the eyes is the Light of Hochma. 

When a growing Partzuf attains Gadlut, receives the clothing of Ohr Hassadim 
of the Upper World from AVI, and RYU clothe in Ohr Hassadim, this Partzuf is 
called AB (72) names, as each three letters join into one and RYU = 216 letters 
turn into AB = seventy-two groups with three letters in each group, or AB = 
seventy-two names. 

When Ohr Hassadim, the clothing of the Partzuf, comes only from the lower 
world, it is defined as RYU = 216 letters. And when it attains AB, Hassadim 
of the Upper World, each three letters form a group, and this results in AB = 
seventy-two names, as it is written, HE CONFIRMED IN HIM ALL THESE 
LETTERS. When Elisha revived Havakuk, the son of the Shunamit, he created 
the name Havakuk, AB = seventy-two letters from RYU = 216, for he gave him 
Ohr Hassadim of the Upper World from AB. 

Because of it, all 216 letters made groups of three and formed three lines 
from Above downwards: right, left and middle. A cell made of three letters—the 
right, left, and middle lines, situated horizontally (referring to the same screen 
and type of Kli)— is regarded as one. Therefore, AB (seventy-two) letters is used 



The Donkey Driver 


265 


instead of AB (seventy-two) names, because each letter is considered to include 
three, merged into one. When Ohr Hochma enters these seventy-two cells, the 
Partzuf is called AB and is said to have the complete Light of Hochma. 



One cell. In all, there are 72 
such 3-letter cells (names) 


Ohr Hassadim is die Light that brings peace in the state of the Partzuf at a 
given moment, for its property is not to wish anything for itself, but to bestow. 
However, O hr Hassadim received from the lower world is merely comfort “for 
want of something better,” whereas Ohr Hassadim received from the Upper World 
creates such a powerful property of “bestowal” that the Partzuf receives Ohr Hochma, 
thereby showing that although it has Ohr Hochma, it still prefers Ohr Hassadim. 

This is similar to a person in our world, who says that he needs nothing. Yet, 
there is a distinction: does he say this in a state when he has nothing and can 
have everything he wants, but still wishes to restrict himself to bare essentials 
and to give away the rest? 

Therefore, when the growing Partju/(the son—BON) had only Ohr Hassadim 
from the lower world, it could not receive Ohr Hochma in it, and was thus called 
RYU letters. But since the impure forces still cling to them and tempt the Partzuf 
to receive Ohr Hochma for itself, Ohr Hochma cannot be clothed within them. 

These RYU letters that Havakuk had since the day of his birth FLEW AWAY 
WHEN HE DIED. Hence, it was essential to give him RYU letters and AB 
names once more. And Elisha did just that by HIS SPIRIT, for he was obliged 








266 


The Zohar 


to recreate in him RYU letters in order to combine them into AB cells with 
the help of the Upper Hassadim (combine everything into three lines), when 
everything unites into AB names. 

117. Elisha confirmed all of these letters in the soul of Havakuk so as to revive 
him by the letters of the seventy-two names. And he called him Havakuk, for that 
is his complete name, which describes all of his properties, as it alludes to two 
Havakuks and to the 216 letters of the Holy Name, as the Qematria (numerical 
value) of the name Havakuk is 216, from which the seventy-two names were 
formed. By AB names he revived him and brought his spirit back, and by RYU 
letters he revived his body and let it live. This is why he is called Havakuk. 

Havakuk = Chet + Bet + Kuf + Vav + Kuf = 8 + 2 + 100 + 6 + 100 = 216. 
The word Havakuk indicates two embraces ( Hibukim , plural for Hibuk). Like 
all Hebrew names, it refers to the property of its bearer. For instance, Yaakov 
is derived from “Akev” (“got around” Esav), and Avraham signifies Av —father, 
Am—of the nation). 

The first embrace came from Ima, but it did not yet allow Ohr Hochma into 
the Partzuf, into RYU letters, for the impure force clings to the red in Ima. But 
then Elisha embraced him with Hassadim of the Upper World that came from 
AVI. This united the letters into groups (names), and Ohr Hochma entered and 
filled these names permanently, since the impure force cannot cling to Hassadim 
of the Upper World. 

As in the above example, even if all the Ohr Hochma were to be offered, the 
Partzuf, upon receiving protection in the form of a desire for Hassadim of the 
Upper World, receives such great strength (desire) to bestow that it never wants 
Hochma. This is precisely why Hochma can fill it for all eternity. 

Therefore, the name Havakuk denotes two Chibukim (embraces): one from 
the mother and one from Elisha, thereby imparting him with perfection from all 
sides: from both the Ohr Hochma and the Ohr Hassadim. “Embraces” signify Ohr 
Hassadim that stems from AVI, and Ohr Hochma received within Ohr Hassadim 
is called “the secrets of RYU.” 

It is hence written that HE REVIVED HIS SPIRIT BY AB NAMES AND 
HIS BODY BY RYU LETTERS. And he was revived by Elisha’s embrace, for 
RYU letters had formed names, that is, the three lines, in which Ohr Hochma 
could be received, thanks to the reception of Ohr Hassadim from AVI (the 
Upper World). 

The impure forces (man’s egoistic desires) cannot attack in this Light. 
Hence, death (the result of receiving Ohr Hochma for oneself) does not exist. 



The Donkey Driver 


267 


Subsequently, he receives Ohr Hochma, which yields the complete correction 
of his Guf. 

However, die Partzuf (son of the Shunamit) had RYU letters from the moment 
of birth, and they left him when he died. Then why is he called Havakuk (two 
embraces)? After all, the first embrace of Ima (mother) left him the moment 
of his death, and Elisha revived him from death by embracing him only once. 
Thus, does he not contain only the embrace of Elisha? 

The thing is that Elisha has given him nothing new at die time of resurrection, 
except for the embrace, die Light from die Supernal Ima—SAG, whose Light 
evokes the resurrection of the dead. And RYU letters were simply revived by his 
lower mother—BON. These are the same RYU of BON with which he was born. 
Otherwise, it would have been an entirely new soul, of which one would not 
have been able to say that it was dead and then resurrected. 

Therefore, now he truly has two embraces, for the first one has now been 
revived as well, when BON ascended to SAG. And since BON is in the place of 
SAG, his Hassadim are regarded as those of the Supernal Mother. They completely 
neutralize the impure forces and death, for their properties (desires) are only of 
bestowal, which the impure force cannot bear. Thus, they can no longer tempt 
man. This is why he is called Havakuk, after the action of the two embraces. 

118. He said, “I have heard the Creator and I am awed by His Name.” I 
have heard of what I had and have had a taste of the other world at the 
moment of death, before Elisha resurrected him, and I am awed. He began 
asking for mercy for his soul. He said, “O, Creator, the deeds that You 
have performed for me throughout the years were my life.” And whoever 
connects to the past years (the name of the Sefirot of Atik), connects to life. 
Throughout the years, bestow life upon the degree that has no life of its 
own, upon Malchut de Malchut. 

His fear comes from the past, previous states, for now he has become perfect 
on all his sides, and therefore fear has no place. This fear remained from the past, 
when he left the world. This describes the state between death and resurrection. 
However, he continues receiving fear from the past state, so it would help him 
create a screen for raising MAN. It is precisely this fear from past times (states) 
that stimulates him to raise MAN (request for mercy). 

This is the secret of the future screen, after BON becomes SAG. For then 
“He will eradicate death forever” (Yeshayahu, 25:8), and there will be no force 
evoking fear of death and suffering or able to cause harm to one’s purity and 
holiness. Hence, there will be no need to shun, no one to beware of or avoid. 



268 


The Zohar 


So if one has attained such an exalted spiritual state, where could he possibly 
acquire fear? After all, he will not be able to ascend without it! Only if he takes 
fear from his past states! For the Partzuf retains the memories, records, recollec¬ 
tions of past states, even after its ascent to SAG, when BON become like SAG. 

If not for the recollections of fear from the past states, the Partzuf would 
not have been able to create a screen in a state when it has nothing left to fear. 
While explaining this, Rabbi Shimon told them of Havakuk, to teach them how 
to acquire fear, just as Havakuk did by taking fear from the past. 

THE DEEDS THAT YOU HAVE PERFORMED... THROUGHOUT 
THE YEARS... WERE MY LIFE—because he lived through two periods: the 
years preceding his death and the years following his resurrection. Between 
these two periods, there was a state of exiting this world, death (during which 
he existed in the other world). That is to say, because I remember the time of 
my death, I thereby connect to life of the Upper World, which Elisha bestowed 
by resurrecting me. 

ZAT de Atik is called the “past (sometimes ancient) years,” since they receive 
their Light from Malchut of the world of AK, Malchut of T zimtzum Aleph. 
However, ZAT de At ik do not shine upon the lower Partzufim and worlds with 
their Light of Tzimtzum Aleph. ZAT de At ik shine downward during the 6,000 
years with diminished Light, restricting it according to the laws of Tzimtzum Bet. 
Only at the end of correction will they begin to pass down all of their Light. It is 
written in the Torah that the Light that Atik had passed during the 6,000 years 
is designated with the small letter Hey in the word Avraham. 

However, because Havakuk’s death has purified him completely, since at the 
end of correction he merited merging with the “past years” of Atik, he received 
the required strength in Elisha’s embraces and resurrection. It is hence written 
that after he has purified himself and felt fear at the moment of his death, the 
power of this fear enabled him to establish contact with ZAT de Atik and receive 
the Light called “eternal life.” 

For having purified himself through death, BON received complete 
correction, upon ascending and becoming SAG at the time of death. Subsequently, 
it reaches the degree of Malchut de Malchut, a Z ivug on which can only be made 
at the end of correction, and attains this degree, the Light of his life. 

119. Rabbi Shimon wept and said: “And I have seen from the Creator what 
I have heard.” He raised his hands above his head, and said: “But you have 
merited seeing Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba, the Light of the Torah, face to face, 
while I have not.” He fell on his face and saw him who uproots mountains and 



The Donkey Driver 


269 


lights candles in the Temple of the King (M ashiach). He said to him, “Rabbi, 
in the other world we shall be neighbors with the heads of the assemblies 
before the Creator.” From here on, he called his son Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi 
Aba by the name Pnei’el (the face of God), as it is written: “For I have seen 
the Creator face to face.” 

He praised himself for using the same fear from the past, just like Proph¬ 
et Havakuk. 

All corrections are already ready and waiting in the hall of the King 
(M ashiach), down to the very last detail. They must all be revealed at the end of 
all corrections, with the appearance of the King. And the souls in that hall are 
those who merited completion of their individual corrections, for there is an 
individual correction and a general one. 

Malchut de Malchut is the only creation, and it is divided into parts called 
souls. These parts merge with people of our world, and each of them, while 
existing within man, must attain one’s own correction, i.e., gradually replace 
one’s properties (desires) with those of the Creator. This is considered the soul’s 
individual or personal correction. So then, the souls that have attained their 
individual correction reach and exist in the state called “abiding in the hall of 
the King-Maskiack.” 

The Light in that hall (the Light of the Torah), also called Hamnuna-Saba, 
completely liberates man from the impure forces, i.e., purifies him from all his 
primordial egoistic desires and corrects Malchut de Malchut, which “appears to 
the righteous as a high mountain” (Talmud, Sota, 52). This correction is made 
by creating a new SAG-like screen with the purpose of raising MAN (the request 
for final correction). MAN is called Me’orei Esh (sparkles of fire), as it is written: 
“Man’s soul is the Creator’s candle” (Mishley, 20:27). 

The light of the sun designates the Light’s descent, MAD, just as sunlight 
descends upon us from Above, whereas a fire’s flame signifies Ohr Hozer 
that rises from below upwards, like candlelight. The Zohar therefore says that 
these two corrections, aimed at destroying the impure forces and ascending to 
light the candles in the hall of the King-M ashiach, are in the hands of Rabbi 
Hamnuna-Saba. 

And the perfect righteous in need of these two final corrections merit 
receiving them only through revealing the soul of Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba. And 
he stated that they (the disciples of Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba) will merit the 
honor of serving in the hall of the King-Maskiack after their death, and will 
become his neighbors and the heads of the Creator’s Assembly. 




The Two Points 


120. Rabbi Chiya began and opened, “The beginning of Hochma (wisdom) is 
fear of the Creator, and those who observe this rule receive all the goodness.” 
He asks, “The beginning of wisdom? One should rather say that the end of 
wisdom is the fear of the Creator, for fear of the Creator is the property 
of M alchut, which is at the end of Hochma (wisdom).” He replies, “Yet, 
Malchut is the beginning of the entrance to the degrees of reception of the 
Supernal wisdom.” Hence, it is written, “Open to me the gates of justice,” 
meaning that the gates of Malchut, called “justice,” are the Creator’s gates. 
And if man does not enter these gates he shall not reach the Supernal King 
through any other, for He is concealed and detached, and has erected many 
gates on the path to Him. 

Fear of the Creator is the Sefira Malchut. Yet, how can Malchut serve as an 
entrance if she is the last of the ten Se/irot? Indeed, she may be called the end of 
Hochma or of a Partzuf, but not the beginning. However, this is not an allegorical 
expression, but the essence itself, for HE IS CONCEALED AND DETACHED 
and no thought of man can attain Him. Hence, He has put up many gates 
ON THE PATH TO HIM, and thanks to these gates He grants sufferers the 
opportunity to draw closer to him, the opportunity for attainment. 

This is precisely what the verse, “Open to me the gates of justice,” (Tehilim, 
118) alludes to; these are the very gates that the Creator made, through 
which people can come to Him. HOWEVER, AT THE END OF ALL THE 
GATES ERECTED A SPECIAL GATE WITH MANY LOCKS. This gate is 
Malchut de Malchut, the ultimate point of all creation, the ultimate point of 
all Supernal gates. 

And this last gate (from Above downwards) is the first gate to Supernal 
wisdom (from below upwards), for it is impossible to attain the Supernal Hochma 


271 



The Zohar 


27 2 


(wisdom) without attaining precisely this final gate, as it is the first gate with 
regard to attainment of the Supernal wisdom. It is therefore written (Tehilim, 
111:10): “Fear of the Creator is the beginning of wisdom,” as fear of the Creator 
is called the final gate, which stands first on the path to Supernal attainment. 

121. And at the end of all the gates He erected a special gate with several 
locks, several entrances, and several chambers, one atop of the other. And He 
said, “Whoever wishes to reach Me, let this be the first gate on his way to Me. 
Whoever enters through this gate—will enter.” Only this is the first gate to the 
Supernal wisdom, the gate of fear of the Creator, Malchut, which is hence 
called “beginning.” 

The locks, entrances, and chambers are three successive processes of 
attainment, of realizing the spiritual in one’s inner sensation. The thought that 
created the world was the Creator’s thought to make a creation (the human 
soul) in order to fill it with delight. However, it is impossible to feel delight as 
long as one is removed from the Creator, for He is the only One in existence. 
And He has created us in such a way that the nearer we come to Him, the greater 
delight we feel, whereas the farther we are from Him, the more we suffer. 

Those of us who live in and perceive only this world can only accept the above 
words on faith or reject them. However, Kabbalists, who ascend spiritually and 
draw closer to the Creator, make these assertions and describe their attainments 
for us. And as to how and when we shall travel the same path to the Creator and 
attain complete unity with Him, this depends on us alone. However, regardless 
of whether we want to or not, we will need to travel the entire path from our 
world to complete unity with the Creator while still existing in this body, during 
one of our lifetimes in this world. This is the purpose of creation, and until it is 
fulfilled, man must reincarnate and return to this world, as the sages said: “The 
Creator wished to dwell in the lower ones.” 

Our world is built completely opposite from the Creator, as it was created 
in the property of egoistic will to receive pleasure, and this property is the exact 
antithesis to the Creator’s property (desire) to delight us. Additionally, there is 
no trace of a will to receive pleasure in the Creator Himself. 

It is hence said about a person in our world: “Man is born akin to a wild ass” 
( lyov , 11:12). Therefore, to those who live in this world, the Creator’s governance 
seems completely opposite to the purpose of creation—to delight the creatures. 
After all, that is how we perceive His rule over us, and feel the surrounding 
world in our egoistic sensations. 



The Two Points 


273 


According to the Creator’s plan, one must correct his egoistic desires and 
make them altruistic, whereupon the Creator fulfills them with supernal, 
absolute delight (to the extent of their correction). Until one attains this state, he 
continues to suffer from his desire to enjoy either this world or the spiritual. 

These sensations are called “gate locks,” for all the numerous contradictions 
to the oneness of the Creator’s actions that we feel in this world separate us 
from the Creator and prevent us from drawing closer to Him. However, when 
we exert to observe the Torah and Mityrot with love, with our heart and soul, 
as devotedly as it was prescribed for us, with the sole intention of pleasing the 
Creator and without any benefit for ourselves, all of the forces that separate 
us from Him and every contradiction that we overcome on our path to Him 
becomes a gate of attainment of His Supernal wisdom, of O hr Hochma. This is 
because every contradiction reveals its own uniqueness in the attainment of the 
Creator’s governance. 

Thus, those very questions and contradictions, which initially seemed 
to prevent us from accepting the oneness of the Creator’s governance, then 
turn into knowledge, thanks to which we come to understand and attain the 
oneness of His governance. 

And those who merit this transform darkness into Light (within themselves) 
and bitterness into sweetness. This is how they feel their attainments—in precisely 
those past sensations of darkness and bitterness. For the forces that repel us 
from the Creator, that form our minds and are perceived by the body as bitter 
turn into gates of attainment of Supernal Degrees. This way, darkness becomes 
Light and bitterness becomes sweetness. 

And the more negative the Creator’s governance is first perceived, the 
deeper man eventually comes to realize the perfection of His governance. At 
last, the entire world ends up on the scale of merit, for every force and insight 
now serve as SHAAREY TZEDEK (the gates of truth), through which one can 
enter and receive from the Creator everything that He intended to bestow at the 
Thought of Creation. Thus, it is written about such contradictions that turn 
into realization of unity: “These are the gates to the Creator; the righteous shall 
enter them” (Tehilim, 118:20). 

Hence, until one merits turning his will “to receive for himself’ into the will 
“to receive for the Creator” with the help of the Torah and Mitzvot, all the gates 
to the Creator have sturdy locks (the sensation of imperfection in the Creator’s 
governance), as they then play their opposite role: to distance and turn one away 



274 


The Zohar 


from the Creator. And they are called locks, for they lock the gates of contact 
with the Creator and distance us from Him. 

However, if we make efforts to overcome them so they stop influencing 
us and weakening our love for the Creator, we will thus turn these locks into 
entrances, darkness into Light, and bitterness into sweetness. This is because 
for every lock we receive a special degree of attainment of the Creator. These 
degrees become entrances that lead to the degrees of sensation of the Creator 
Himself. And the degrees themselves turn into halls or chambers of wisdom. 

Thus, we see that locks, entrances, and chambers constitute the three types 
of perception of one material, our will to receive or egoism. Indeed, before we 
turn the egoistic desire to receive into reception (of pleasure) for the Creator’s 
sake, altruism, this material transforms Light into darkness and sweetness 
into bitterness, in accordance with our (egoistic) taste. In other words, egoism 
finds suffering in the same types of influence that bring pleasure to altruism. 
Therefore, to perceive the Light (delight) that surrounds us, we only need 
to change our senses. But until we do, this Light will be perceived by us as 
darkness and suffering. 

Initially, whatever examples of the Creator’s governance we see, they distance 
us from Him. This is because we perceive them negatively; at that very moment, 
our egoism (will to receive pleasure) begets locks. However, once we transform 
our desires to “reception for the Creator’s sake,” these locks become entrances, 
and entrances turn into chambers—vessels of wisdom, O hr Hochma. 

As we already know, the end of all the degrees, i.e., the very last degree, 
below which nothing can possibly exist, is called Malchut de Malchut. To attain 
Supernal wisdom, one must first overcome this last gate, which turns into 
the first gate to ascend from below upwards, toward the chamber of Supernal 
wisdom, the Sefira Hochma. All gates become entrances and chambers of the 
Creator’s wisdom. This is why it is written, IN THE BEGINNING (the first 
words in the Torah), for IN THE BEGINNING signifies fear of the Creator, 
the last gate (Malchut), which becomes the first on the path to attainment of the 
Supernal wisdom. 

122. The letter Bet in the word BERESHEET (IN THE BEGINNING) 
indicates that the two are joined together in Malchut. Both are points: one 
is concealed, while the other is revealed. However, since there’s no division 
between them, they are called THE BEGINNING, which signifies only one, 
rather than two, for he who takes one, takes the other as well, and all is one, 




The Two Points 


275 


for He and His Name are one, as it is written, “And you shall know that this 
is the Creator’s only name.” 

The Hebrew letter Bet has a numerical value of two, indicating two points. 
These two points symbolize the correction of the egoistic point of Malchut, 
onto which the point of mercy ( Bina ) imposes a restriction of use. Correction 
is achieved when Malchut (strictness) ascends to Bina (mercy), as it is written, 
“So they both walked” (Rut, 1:19), i.e., Bina and Malchut. Hence, the screen in 
Malchut consists of both points, and they are thereby joined together as one. 

It is explained in Megilat Rut (The Book of Ruth) how Malchut (Ruth) merges 
with Bina (Naomi), which then leads to the correction of Malchut and the 
birth of David, the first King (the word King (M elech) is derived from Malchut 
(kingdom) of Israel). 

HOWEVER, ONE IS CONCEALED, WHILE THE OTHER IS 
REVEALED, for the judgment in the point of Malchut is concealed, whereas 
only the property of mercy in the point of Bina is revealed. Otherwise, the world 
could not exist, as it is written, “In the beginning, He created the world with 
the property of judgment, but seeing that it cannot exist, He attached to it the 
property of mercy” (Beresheet Raba, item 1). 

Although the restriction is concealed, this does not mean that a Z ivug is not 
made on it, since these two points merge into one, and the point of Malchut 
receives a Zivug together with the point of Bina, though it participates in it 
secretly. Therefore, it is written, IN THE BEGINNING, for the word “beginning” 
indicates one point, which includes two that are as one. 

Because Malchut participates with Bina in all the Zivugim that are made 
during the 6,000 years (albeit secretly), she corrects herself to such an extent that 
at the end of all the corrections, even her property of restriction is corrected, 
and she acquires the property of Bina. It is written of this state that on that day 
He and His Name will be one. 

Since the property of restriction is also concealed within the letter Bet of 
the word BERESHEET (in the beginning), this property is called RESHEET 
(first) in Hochma (wisdom). However, the correction of this property occurs 
only at the end of corrections, when the Supernal wisdom is revealed, as the 
prophet said: “For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Creator” 
(Yeshayahu, 11:9). This is because the last gate will become the first. Hence, it is 
written, “That they may know that it is Thou alone whose name is the Lord, the 
Most High over all the earth,” (Tehilim, 83:19) for the Creator’s wisdom will be 
revealed in our world to all. 



276 


The Zohar 


123. Why is Malchut called “fear of the Creator?” It is because Malchut is the 
Tree of Good and Evil: If man merits, it is good, but if he does not, it is evil. 
This is why fear dwells in that place. And this gate leads to all the goodness 
that exists in the world. ALL THE GOODNESS signifies two gates, two points 
that are as one. Rabbi Yosi said that ALL THE GOODNESS refers to the Tree 
of Life, for it is entirely good and completely without evil. And because it is 
without evil, it is entirely good, without evil. 

It is written of the last gate: THE BEGINNING OF WISDOM IS FEAR 
OF THE CREATOR. So why is it called “fear of the Creator?” Because this 
is the secret of the Tree of Knowledge, by which Adam sinned, for the use of 
that point (egoistic desires) is punishable by death (disappearance of the Light). 
And great fear is needed to refrain from touching (using) it before all the other 
desires have been corrected. Nevertheless, at the end of correction, when even 
this point is completely corrected, death will cease to exist for all eternity. That 
is why it is called “fear.” 

The Creator created one creation—the egoistic Malchut. The goal of creation 
is to fill her with the Creator’s Light using an altruistic intention. As a result, 
Malchut merges with the Creator and receives limitless delight. 

Malchut, the only creation, consists of five parts: KHB ZA-M. Her parts 
KHB ZA, excluding Malchut de Malchut, have altruistic properties, which they 
received from the Light. 

As a result of her decision to refrain from receiving Light into egoistic 
desires, called Tzimtzum Aleph (the first restriction), Malchut receives the Light 
only in her first four desires: KHB-ZA. Malchut de Malchut remains inaccessible 
to the Light. So how can she be corrected? 

To correct Malchut de Malchut’s properties (desires), the Creator creates 
the conditions under which Bina and Malchut mix, and consequently, Malchut 
acquires the properties of Bina. 

This process needs to occur more than once, so that all of Malchut’s parts 
will be mixed with Bina. Every time it takes place in an increasingly deeper layer 
of Malchut, it is called the breaking of holiness, for Bina descends and passes 
her properties to Malchut, but she herself breaks during this mixing, as though 
losing her altruistic properties. 

Thus, we can conclude that all the shattering of vessels, the breaking of 
Adam’s soul, the ruin of the First and Second Temples, and other spiritual 
disasters take place not as punishment, for punishment (as we understand it) 



The Two Points 


277 


does not exist in the spiritual, but only so as to enable the altruistic desires of 
Bina penetrate deeper into the egoistic desires of Malchut. 

The last point of Malchut, the yet uncorrected Malchut de Malchut, is that 
very point the use of which is punishable by death (the Light’s disappearance is 
considered death). It is forbidden to use Malchut de Malchut until all the other 
properties of Malchut ( KHB-ZA ) have been fully corrected. Or rather, if man 
refrains from using egoism (the point of Malchut de Malchut ), and uses only 
his other altruistic desires, he gradually constructs a “non-reception” screen on 
Malchut de Malchut. 

Having filled all of his corrected desires with Light, man achieves the end 
of correction—of what he could correct by himself. As soon as that happens, 
i.e., as soon as one receives the Light in all of his soul’s first nine Sefirot (KHB- 
ZA, excluding Malchut ), the Light called M ashiach descends from Above, which 
imparts Malchut de Malchut with the altruistic property of bestowal, of acting for 
the Creator’s sake. This concludes the entire correction process of man’s soul, 
and he attains complete unity with the Creator. The Creator’s goal is for man 
to attain this state while still living in our world and in his physical body, to 
combine all the worlds, spiritual and material, within himself. 

AND THIS GATE LEADS TO ALL THE GOODNESS, for there is nothing 
better than the revelation of the Supernal wisdom in the world, included in 
the Thought of Creation. And since fear of the Creator is the last gate to the 
Supernal wisdom, it also constitutes the gate to all the goodness. 

THESE TWO GATES ARE AS ONE refers to the two points, Bina and 
Malchut, which are united in the letter Bet of the word BERESHEET (IN THE 
BEGINNING), the first word in the Torah. And the two points are mentioned 
because they allude to the state following the correction, when these two points 
are called “the two gates,” for both turn out to be good and free from evil, 
thereby bringing man only perfect goodness. 

Nevertheless, until the end of correction, one must strain to separate within 
him the desires that refer to the point of Bina from those that refer to the point 
of Malchut, to reject the desires of Malchut, and, in defiance of egoism, use 
the desires of Bina. During man’s work on self-correction, called “6,000 years,” 
these two points are referred to as “The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.” 

RABBI YOSI SAID—Rabbi Yosi does not object to the words of Rabbi Chiya. 
They are talking about two different states: Rabbi Chiya alludes to a state past 
the end of correction of Malchut, when both points become a gate, and there 
is no more evil within them. And Rabbi Yosi explains a state in the correction 




278 


The Zohar 


process, when the two points, Bina and Malchut, exist within us as our Tree of 
Knowledge of Good and Evil. Hence, he tells us that ALL THE GOODNESS 
IS (can only be found in) THE TREE OF LIFE. 

ZA filled with the Light of Ima-Bina is called “The Tree of Life,” for he 
possesses only good properties. And the two points of good and evil, Bina and 
Malchut, remain within Malchut until the end of correction; hence, Malchut is 
called “The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.” 

124. To all those who act, it is the faithful mercy of David that upholds the 
Torah. Those who keep the Torah seemingly create it themselves. All those who 
study the Torah—there is no action in them as they study, but those who keep 
the Torah—in them there is action. And the world exists by this force, eternal 
are the wisdom and the Torah, and the throne stands just as it should stand. 

It was previously said that fear of the Creator constitutes the last gate, though 
it is the first gate to the Supernal wisdom. It turns out that ALL THOSE WHO 
STUDY THE TORAH have already corrected the last gate, and the two points 
become for them two entrances, all goodness without evil. Hence, it is said that 
THERE IS NO ACTION IN THEM, i.e., no analysis of good and evil, for they 
have already corrected everything. 

However, those who have not yet reached the end of correction are referred 
to as those who keep the Torah. There is action in them, for they have not yet 
corrected good and evil in everyone’s Tree of Good and Evil—not everyone has 
realized in one’s inner tree (in all of one’s properties) what is good and what is 
evil with regard to the spiritual truth. 

It is therefore said that THOSE WHO KEEP THE TORAH SEEMINGLY 
CREATE IT THEMSELVES. As a result of man’s effort to refrain from their 
use, all the distracting and impeding forces (thoughts and desires) of the point 
of Malchut become gates, all the locks become entrances, and all the entrances 
become chambers of wisdom filled with Ohr Hochma. 

It follows that all the wisdom and the entire Torah become revealed only 
through the efforts of those who keep the Torah. Hence, they SEEMINGLY 
CREATE IT THEMSELVES. The forces of good and evil are combined within 
them, and they become those who keep the Torah, for the Torah is revealed 
thanks to their inner work of separating and correcting good and evil. 

Such people are called “those who act,” for they seemingly create the Torah 
by themselves. After all, without perceiving the Creator (The Torah, Light) as 
concealed, and then overcoming this concealment, thereby turning it into gates, 
entrances, and chambers the Torah could never have been revealed. 



The Two Points 


279 


The perfection of the Creator’s actions lies in the fact that by creating man 
so paltry (with such insignificant egoistic desires, completely opposite to the 
Creator in his properties, and utterly powerless to change himself), the Creator 
gave man an opportunity to become like Him (in properties, greatness, and the 
sensation of creating himself), to create within and by himself all of the worlds 
and the Torah. By revealing the Light, it is as though man actually creates it. 

Thus, since these individuals reveal the Torah, they are regarded as its 
creators. The word is SEEMINGLY used to indicate that the Torah was created 
before the creation of our world (Talmud, Pesachim, 54:1), and of course, it is the 
work of the Creator Himself. Yet, without the good deeds of those who keep the 
Torah, it would not have been revealed to the world. Hence, they are regarded 
as the makers and creators of the Torah. 

The wisdom and the Torah are eternal; that is, they exist even after the 
end of correction, for fear of the Creator is needed even then. However, once 
the entire egoism is corrected, there is no place from which to take this fear, 
for the Tree of Good and Evil becomes only good, and can no longer furnish 
fear of the Creator. 

However, because they received fear in the past, they can continue using it 
in the present, after the end of correction, when there is nothing left to fear, as 
there are no restrictions in Malchut. And the only reason they can do so is that 
during the correction they worked on creating within them the sensation of the 
Creator’s absolute rule and the eternity of the Torah. And since this fear is never- 
ending, the Creator’s throne remains forever standing in their attainment. 





The Night of the Bride 


125. Rabbi Shimon was sitting and studying the Torah on the night when the 
Bride, M alchut, unites with her husband, Zeir A npin. And all the friends 
present in the bridal chamber on that night, the eve of the holiday of Shavuot 
(Pentecost), must stand together with the bridegroom under the Huppah 
(wedding canopy), and be with him this whole night, and rejoice with him 
in the corrections of the Bride, i.e., study the Torah, then Prophets, then 
Holy Scriptures, and finally the wisdom, for these corrections are the Bride’s 
adornments. And the Bride receives corrections, adorns herself with them, 
and rejoices with them all of that night. And on the next day, on the holiday of 
Shavuot, she only comes to the Huppah together with them. And her friends, 
who studied the Torah all night long, are called the sons of the Huppah. And as 
she approaches the Huppah, the Creator asks about them, blesses and adorns 
them with the Bride’s adornments. Happy are those who merit this! 

All the days of exile are called night, for this is when the Creator’s face is 
concealed from Israel, as the impure forces rule and separate His loyal servants 
from Him. Yet, this is the time when the bride unites with her husband (in 
Hebrew, “husband” and “master” are the same word, so one must keep in mind 
the second meaning of the word as well). The Huppah is a wedding canopy, under 
which the ritual of union between a bride and a bridegroom (their merging in 
a Zivug) takes place. 

The union between the bride and her husband (The Zohar uses the word 
“husband” instead of “bridegroom”) occurs thanks to the Torah and Mitzvot 
(commandments) of the righteous, referred to as “those who keep the Torah.” 
And all the Supernal Degrees, called “secrets of the Torah,” become revealed 
thanks to them alone, for they are also called MAKERS (as though CREATING 
the Torah itself), as is described in item 124. Therefore, the time of exile is called 
the NIGHT WHEN THE BRIDE UNITES WITH HER HUSBAND. AND 


281 



282 


The Zohar 


ALL THE FRIENDS, THE SONS OF THE BRIDE’S JOY, ARE CALLED 
THOSE WHO KEEP THE TORAH. 

And after THE END OF CORRECTION and complete deliverance, of 
which the prophet Zachariah writes (14:7): “And there shall be one day, which 
shall be known to the Creator, neither day nor night, but it shall come to pass 
come evening time: there shall be light.” THE NEXT DAY, THE BRIDE AND 
HER HUSBAND ENTER THE HUPPAH, for BON will become like SAG and 
MA will be like AB (see item 64). 

This state is therefore defined as the next day and a new Huppah. Whereas 
at this time (in this state), the righteous are called SONS OF THE HUPPAH, 
in whom there is no action, for then, as it is written: “They shall not do evil 
upon My holy mountain, for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the 
Creator, as waters cover the sea” ( Yeshayahu , 11:9). 

And since these righteous elevated BON to SAG by their actions, i.e., made 
its properties similar to those of SAG, they are considered to have made a new 
Huppah, they are called “sons of the Huppah.” 

The night of Shavuot (Pentecost) is when THE BRIDE UNITES WITH HER 
HUSBAND, for the Huppah takes place on the next day, the day of Shavuot, the 
day of the reception of the Torah. On that day, all of creation achieves the state 
of the end of correction, as it is said: “He will swallow up death forever; and the 
Creator Himself will wipe away the tears off all faces” (Yeshayahu, 25:8). 

The Torah describes this state as “engraved upon the scrolls” (Shemot, 32:16). 
In Hebrew, the word “engraved” is Harut, but it should be pronounced Herat 
(freedom), freedom from the angel of death. However, the sin of the golden calf 
followed and the High Degree was lost. Since Shavuot is the day when the Torah 
was received, it is also regarded as the end of correction. 

Therefore, all the necessary preparations (the corrections carried out 
during the concealment period) are completed beforehand, on the night 
before the holiday of Shavuot. This night is hence defined as the night when 
the bride unites with her husband so as to enter the Huppah the following 
day, on the holiday of Shavuot, when all the corrections are completed and 
liberated from the angel of death, thanks to the actions of the righteous, who 
erect a new Huppah. 

All of the bride’s friends, those who keep the Torah, also called “sons of 
the bridal chamber,” must be merged with the Shechina-Malchut (the bride) all 
of that night, called “exile.” Only then do their acts in the Torah and Mitzvot 



The Night of the Bride 


283 


correct and purify the good in her from the taint of evil, so she would emerge 
with the properties that contain only good, without evil. 

Hence, those who keep the Torah should rejoice together with the bride 
for all the great corrections that they’ve made in her. Then they joyously 
continue with their corrections in THE TORAH, then in PROPHETS and 
finally in the HOLY SCRIPTURES. All the degrees and revelations of the 
secrets of the Torah, which make up the framework of the Shechina herself at 
the end of her correction, are made exclusively by the righteous, who keep the 
Torah during the exile. 

Therefore, all the degrees that emerge at the time (state) of the exile are 
called the bride’s corrections and adornments from the Torah, Prophets and 
Holy Scriptures, for Sefirot Hesed, Gevura, and Tifferet constitute the Torah, Sefirot 
Netzah, Hod, and Yesod are the Prophets, and Malchut is the Holy Scriptures. The 
Light of VAK is called M idrashim and the Light of GAR is called “the secrets of 
the Torah.” And all these corrections must be made in Malchut (the bride) on 
the night when she completes her corrections (precisely in the darkness of exile 
from the spiritual does man carry out the work of his inner correction). 

It is known that the end of correction does not bring anything new or that 
was previously unknown. Rather, all the MAN and MAD, along with all degrees 
and Z ivugim that have emerged consecutively during the 6,000 years will merge 
into one degree and become corrected with the help of the Light of Atik. 

The bride will then enter her Huppah, and THE CREATOR WILL ASK 
ABOUT EVERYONE, about every man who had even once raised MAN for the 
Supernal, final Z ivug. For the Creator waits for all the small Z ivugim to assemble, 
as though asking about and waiting for each of them. And when they’ve 
gathered, a great Z ivug will unfold, called RAV PAALIM U MEKABTZIEL (HE 
WHO BLESSES AND ADORNS HER). And when all the creatures are blessed 
and adorned together, correction comes to an end. This is referred to as “the 
adornment of the bride’s crown.” 

126. This is why Rabbi Shimon and all of his friends stayed up that night, 
and each of them renewed the Torah again and again. Rabbi Shimon was 
joyous, and so were his friends. Rabbi Shimon said to them: “My sons, how 
blessed is your lot, for it is you who shall accompany the Bride tomorrow 
to the Huppah, for all those who correct Her and rejoice in Her this night 
shall have their names recorded in the Book of Remembrance. And the 
Creator shall bless them with seventy blessings and adornments of crowns 
of the Upper World.” 



284 


The Zohar 


The Book of Remembrance, mentioned by the prophet (Malachi, 3:15): “You 
will say, ‘How futile it is to serve the Creator! When we carried out the Creator’s 
will, and walked heavy-hearted before Him—what is the use of it all? And now 
we regard the wicked as blessed: they have settled in their wickedness, tried the 
Creator, and were liberated.’ Then those who feared the Creator spoke with 
each other, and the Creator hearkened and heard, and a Book of Remembrance 
was recorded before Him for those who fear the Creator and honor His Name. 
‘They shall become chosen for Me on the day that I shall determine, and I shall 
spare them, as a man spares his own son, who serves him.’” 

But how can we understand that when they spoke ill of the Creator, 
they referred to fear of the Creator, as the prophet says? Moreover, they were 
inscribed in the Book of Remembrance as those who “feared the Creator and 
honored His Name?” 

The thing is that at the end of correction, when the great general Zivug 
of Atik manifests, great Light will be revealed in all the worlds, and in this 
Light everyone will return to the Creator in absolute love. The Talmud (Yorna, 
86:2, “Introduction to the Study of the Ten Sefirot”) says: “He who attains the 
repentance from love shall have his sins turned to merits.” 

Here, the prophet refers to the sinners claiming the futility of spiritual 
work: on the great day of the end of correction, when the Light of repentance 
from love shall shine, all the most malicious and deliberate, worst imaginable 
sins, will turn to merits, and their words shall be deemed not slight, but fear 
of the Creator. 

Therefore, all the sins, as well as all the good deeds, are recorded before the 
Creator, for He will need them on that great day of His miracle: all the merits 
gather and complete the Kli, which receives the Light necessary for the final 
correction. Hence, it is said that the Creator shall record the names of those 
who fear Him in the Book of Remembrance, for He will need them on that day 
to complete the common Partzuf. This is exactly what the prophet says: those 
who remain shall be close to the Creator, like sons who served Him. 

It is therefore said that everyone and everything will be recorded in the 
Book of Remembrance, even the sins. However, The Creator will record them 
as though they are merits, as though they served Him. These are the words of 
the prophet. 

The number seventy signifies the Light of Hochma, GAR, adornment, a 
crown, and the Light of Hassadim is called “a blessing,” for the world was created 
with the letter Bet (blessing), as it is written: “The world was built by mercy” 



The Night of the Bride 


285 


(Tehilim , 89:3), which is VAK. But at the end of correction, the Light of Hassadim 
will also be like seventy crowns, like the Light of Hochma, for MA and BON will 
ascend to AB and SAG. Therefore, The Zohar says that the Creator will bless 
them with seventy blessings and adornments of crowns of the Upper World. 

127. Rabbi Shimon opened and said, “The Heavens declare the Creator’s 
greatness. I have already explained this, but when the bride awakens to enter 
the Huppah on the following day, with all the friends who rejoiced with her 
through that night, she rejoices with them, corrects herself and shines with 
her adornments.” 

128. And on the following day, a multitude of masses, hosts, and legions 
join her. And she, together with all these masses, hosts and legions, awaits 
all those who corrected her by studying the Torah on that night. This is so 
because Zeir Anpin unites with Malchut, and she sees her husband, and 
it is said: “The Heavens declare the Creator’s greatness.” “The Heavens” 
alludes to the Bridegroom (ZA), who enters the Huppah. “The Heavens 
declare,” i.e., shine, like the luminescence of a sapphire, upon the entire 
Malchut, from end to end. 

The day of the end of correction is called “tomorrow,” as it is written in 
the Talmud: “Do today, and receive the reward tomorrow” ( Eruvin , 22:1). The 
masses are the worldly masses who do not serve the Creator, the hosts are those 
who serve the Creator, and the legions are chariots of warriors in armor—the 
Supernal groups of angels that accompany the souls, as it is said: “For He bid 
His angels to guard over you on all your paths” ( Tehilim , 91:11). Just as the 
Creator waits for everyone, as was previously stated, so does the Shechina. 

“Heavens” is the bridegroom entering the Huppah—the state of the end of 
correction, of which it is written: “And the light of the moon ( Malchut ) shall 
be as the light of the sun (ZA)” (Yeshayahu, 30:26). The Creator is called the 
“Heavens,” and at the end of correction He is referred to as the “bridegroom,” 
as it is said: “Just as a bridegroom rejoices over his bride, so shall your Creator 
rejoice over you.” ( Yeshayahu , 62:5). 

Wherever it is said that the Creator descends, it indicates His strictness 
and judgment, for it speaks of diminishing His greatness in the eyes of the 
lower ones, as it is said: “His might and greatness are in His place.” But at the 
end of correction, when all sins turn to merits, for it will become clear that all 
the spiritual descents were nothing other than spiritual ascents, the Creator 
becomes the “bridegroom” and the Shechina becomes his “bride.” 



286 


The Zohar 


The Hebrew word for “bride” is Kalah, as in the words Kalat Moshe ( Bamidbar, 
7), which describes the completion of the altar. Hence, in the Torah, the word 
Kalah signifies the end of construction. The Hebrew word for “bridegroom” 
is Hatan, and it signifies the descent along spiritual degrees, as it is said in the 
Talmud: “Descends the steps” (Yevamot, 63:1). However, this descent is greater 
than all the previous ascents, for it takes place on the way towards the bride at 
the moment of the end of correction. 

The Huppah represents the total of all the Returning Light received on the 
MAN raised by the righteous in all the Zivugim at all the times during the 6,000 
years. This is because now they have all gathered into one great Returning Light, 
rising and soaring over the Creator and the Shechina, over the bridegroom and 
his bride, like a Huppah— wedding canopy. 

In this state, the righteous are called “Sons of the Huppah," for each of 
them has a part in this Huppah, to the extent of the MAN they raise to the 
screen of Malchut, which evoked, produced the Returning Light, corresponding 
in magnitude to this MAN. At the end of correction, the Creator is called Hatan 
(bridegroom), for He Nechit Darga— descends from His degree to his bride, and 
enters the Huppah. 

At this time (in this state), the Heavens say—this is a great Zivug of the future, 
as the Talmud says: “The wife speaks to her husband” (Berachot, 3:1). The word 
“speaks” (Mesaperet) implies a Zivug, and is derived from Sapir (sapphire), the 
name of the Shechina, as it is said in the Torah, “...and under His feet—like a 
pavement of sapphire” (Shemot, 24:10). 

THE LUMINESCENT SAPPHIRE is the Returning Light, ascending from 
below upwards. LUMINESCENT, LIKE LUMINESCENCE—The Returning 
Light, LUMINESCENT is equivalent to the Direct Light, LUMINESCENCE. 
This great Zivug gathers all of the Returning Light from all the Zivugim made 
during the 6,000 years, and the Direct Light will shine in it, as it is said, FROM 
END TO END. 

129. The Creator’s glory = EL—is the bride, Malchut, called EL, as it is 
written: “EL rages each day.” She is called EL on all the days of the year. And 
now, on the holiday of Shavuot, when she already entered the Huppah, she 
is called GREATNESS and she is called EL, greatest of the great, luminescent 
out of the luminescent, dominion over dominions. 

El is the name of great mercy. Yet, here it says: “El rages each day,” which is 
contrary to mercy. The Torah says: “And there shall be evening, and there shall 
be morning, one day.” The Shechina is a small star, the Moon, which reigns at 



The Night of the Bride 


287 


night. It is called “fear of Heaven,” for it is the property of the righteous, who 
must raise MAN through their aspiration to be corrected, thereby evoking the 
Returning Light to descend on Malchut from Above and correct her. 

It is therefore written: “The Creator hath made it so man would fear Him” 
(Kohelet, 3:14). This is so because it is impossible to raise the MAN without fear. 
The absence of fear of the Creator is referred to as Malchut’s reign at night, in 
the state of darkness. In the absence of Light, all the restrictions and suffering 
are revealed, as they are opposite to the property of day, mercy. Thus, fear of the 
Creator emerges; were it not for this fear, the property of morning and day could 
not be revealed. 

So it is written: “And there shall be evening, and there shall be morning, 
one day.” Night also enters morning, for without a night, there would be no 
morning, and one cannot do without night. It is hence written that EL RAGES 
EACH DAY. After all, the property of mercy, called EL, is revealed only with the 
help of the night, through the property of RAGE. Hence, this property is also 
regarded as mercy; and consequently, the Shechina is called EL. 

This is why it is said that the CREATOR’S GREATNESS = EL-IS THE 
BRIDE, MALCHDT, CALLED EL, for it is impossible to achieve the state of 
“day” without the state of “night.” So it is in each of the six days of creation, of 
which it is said: “And there shall be evening, and there shall be morning, one 
day.” We see that the night is included in the name “day.” And just as they are 
all called the six DAYS of creation, the 6,000 years are called “night” in the 
property of mercy. 

And in the great Z ivug at the end of correction, a day shall come; the light of 
the moon will become like that of the sun, as the prophet said (Z achariah, 14:7): 
“It shall come to pass, that at evening time there shall be light.” This will cause 
the degrees of Malchut to increase twofold, for even during the 6,000 years, the 
light of the moon was according to the aforesaid, “And there shall be evening, 
and there shall be morning.” 

And at the end of correction, when the moon becomes like the sun (ZA), 
the moon will be twice as great as before, as it will become greatness itself, for 
its greatness will equal that of ZA, of which The Zohar says: THE GREATEST 
OF THE GREAT, DOMINION OVER DOMINIONS. Although it merged 
with the light of the morning during the 6,000 years, as it is said, “And there 
shall be evening, and there shall be morning, one day,” now that it is as big 
as the sun (ZA), it becomes Light, itself, LUMINESCENT OUT OF THE 



288 


The Zohar 


LUMINESCENT. Previously, its Light was solely the result of the inclusion of 
the properties of Higher Sefirot into it. 

Also, DOMINION OVER DOMINIONS, for during the 6,000 years, its 
reign was that of a small star, reigning only at night. Now, however, it also reigns 
during the day, for it is as big as the sun. 

130. The hour when the Heaven (ZA) enters the Huppah and shines upon 
Malchut, all of her friends, who corrected her by studying the Torah, are 
known by their names, as it is said: “The Heavens declare the work of His 
hands.” “The work of His hands” refers to the members of this covenant, 
called “the work of His hands.” As you say: “Confirm for us the work of our 
hands,” which is the mark of the covenant, imprinted on man’s body. 

’’Friends” are those who keep the Torah, which includes both good and 
evil deeds, even those parts of them that are still evil and uncorrected; EACH 
IS KNOWN BY A NAME (his corrected part), as it is said: THE HEAVENS 
DECLARE THE WORK OF HIS HANDS. “Heavens” is the Book of Remem¬ 
brance, which constitutes the Light of the great Zivug that leads to repentance 
(correction) out of love, when sins become merits (Talmud, Yoma, 86:2). 

And even those who were speaking ill things, it is said about them: “Then 
they shall impart their fear of the Creator upon one another” (item 126). 
Therefore, the action defined as “upholding the Torah,” which includes both 
good (for the worthy) and evil (for the unworthy), now becomes completely 
good and holy. And it turns into THE WORK OF HIS HANDS—the Creator’s 
actions, for THE HEAVENS SPEAK even of the unworthy. It turns out that all 
the friends have performed only good deeds and carried out holy work, for they 
would all correct Malchut, and ALL ARE KNOWN BY THEIR NAMES. 

It is therefore said: CONFIRM FOR US THE WORK OF OUR HANDS 
(Tehilim, 90:17). However, it is unclear whose hands are meant: His or ours? Only 
one thing is meant here—that the covenant is referred to as “the work of our hands,” 
for its confirmation is Yesod (Yesod is not only the name of a Sefira, it also means 
“basis,” “foundation” in Hebrew), the foundation of the entire construction. 

The correction of Yesod is Brit Milah (circumcision). Hence, it is said that 
the existence of the covenant is called “the work of our hands,” for we separate 
the Orlah (foreskin) from Yesod through the work of our hands. But this only 
concerns the period up to the end of correction. And at the end of correction, 
THE WORK OF HIS HANDS will be revealed. In other words, the Creator 
Himself will detach the Orlah from us, and THE HEAVENS DECLARE THE 
WORK OF HIS HANDS. But until that state comes, we are entrusted with the 



The Night of the Bride 


289 


correction of the circumcision. Therefore, we ask: CONFIRM FOR US THE 
WORK OF OUR HANDS. 

131. Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba then said as follows: “Do not let your mouth cause 
your body to sin,” i.e., one must not allow his mouth to get close to evil and be 
the cause of sin for the sacred flesh, which bears the mark of the holy covenant 
with the Creator. If he does so, he shall be dragged to hell. And the ruler of 
hell, called Domeh, stands at the gates of hell with hundreds of thousands of 
angels, but he is forbidden to approach those who have kept the holy covenant 
in this world. 

There is a warning here: let each man be careful of what he utters, so that 
his prayer is pure when he raises MAN with the help of the Torah and Mitzvot. 
If the impure force clings to his prayer, it will receive his MAN. As a result, 
man will develop a grudge against the Creator and foreign thoughts, thereby 
causing the Orlah to once again cling to the holy covenant. Consequently, 
his holy soul will fall into the captivity of the impure forces, and they will 
drag it to hell. This is similar to what Rabbi Elazar said about falling into 
Lilit’s hands (item 68). 

THE SACRED FLESH, WHICH BEARS THE MARK OF THE HOLY 
COVENANT alludes to the holy soul guarded by the holy covenant, as it is said: 
“From my flesh I shall see the Creator,” i.e., from my nature, my properties. Yet, 
doubts evoke the return of the impure force of the Orlah. It touches the holy 
covenant, and the Divine soul is instantly driven away. Hence, “The Tree cried 
out: Sinner, do not touch me,” for this Tree is Yesod, Ateret Yesod (foreskin—the 
very essence of creation, egoism), the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. 

DOMEH, THE RULER OF HELL—DOMEH is derived from Dmamal i- 
lifelessness, for he robs man of his soul and leaves him lifeless. This is the angel 
that fills man’s heart with doubts regarding the Creator’s greatness, and creates 
within him a sinful desire to perceive His plans as though they were plans of one 
born of a woman, i.e., as though they were of this world. And since he likens the 
Creator’s thoughts in man’s perception to those of man, he is named so (Domeh 
also means likeness, similarity). 

At first, man understands that the Creator’s thoughts and ways are different 
from ours, for the created mind can grasp neither Him nor His thoughts nor 
His governance, as our mind is inferior to His. But, through sin, the angel 
Domeh plants a silly spirit within man, which forces him to say that the mind 
of one born of a woman is similar to the Creator’s. This leaves man open to 
doubts, which DRAG HIM TO HELL. 



290 


The Zohar 


Therefore, the power of the angel Dorneh is in his name, as it is said: “Who 
is as mighty as You, who is LIKE You, the King that kills and resurrects?” This 
indicates that the connection with the one who is LIKE him leads to death, 
whereas in the realization that there is none like Him, man finds life. 

However, the doubts and thoughts that man receives from the angel Dorneh 
are countless, as The Zohar says, HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF ANGELS 
ARE WITH HIM, and they are all standing at the gates of hell, through which 
man is dragged there, though the gates themselves are not yet considered hell. 

BUT HE (THE ANGEL) IS FORBIDDEN TO APPROACH THOSE 
WHO HAVE KEPT THE HOLY COVENANT IN THIS WORLD. And even if 
one did not fully keep (observe) the covenant, and there is still good and evil in 
his deeds, he is nonetheless regarded as one who has kept the holy covenant. So, 
unless one comes to doubt, the angel Dorneh is forbidden to drag him to hell. 

132. When this happened to King David, fear enveloped him. Right then, 
Dorneh ascended before the Creator, and said: “Master of the world, it says in 
the Torah (Vayikra, 20:10): ‘And the man that commits adultery with another 
man’s wife...’ David broke his covenant, is it not so?” The Creator replied to 
him: “David is righteous, and his holy covenant remains pure, for it is known 
to Me that Bat Sheva was destined for him since the creation of the world.” 

Although David committed no sin, as the Talmud explains (Shahhat, 56:1) that 
he who says that David sinned is wrong, he was enveloped with fear nonetheless, 
as if he really had sinned, for Dorneh cited the Torah in his complaint. 

However, Bat Sheva had been destined for David since the creation of the 
world (Talmud, Sanhedrin, 107:1); thus, he did not violate his covenant. Yet, if Bat 
Sheva had been destined for David, why was she first married to Uriah? After all, 
a wife is half of her husband’s body. And if she is half of David’s body, how could 
Uriah have taken her, if there is nothing in him that corresponds with her? 

The fact is that Bat Sheva is David’s true Nukva (female) from the day of the 
creation of the world, for David is the male part of Malchut, while Bat Sheva 
is the Nukva in Malchut. But since, as the world was being created, Malchut 
ascended to Bina to receive the property of mercy (bestowal) from her, Bat Sheva, 
too, required this correction in GAR. Without it she could not have given birth 
to the soul of King Solomon. 

And Uriah the Hittite was an exalted soul, the properties of GAR, wherefrom 
the name “Uriah,” which consists of Ur = Ohr (Light) and i(a)h = i (Yod) + h (Hey) = 
the first two letters of the Creator’s Name HaVaYaH, is derived. In other words, 
Uriah signifies “the Creator’s Light.” And the fact that his name contains only 



The Night of the Bride 


291 


the first two letters Yod-Hey = Hochma-Bina, and lacks the last two letters Vav- 
Hey = ZA-Malchut indicates that his Light is the Light of GAR. Therefore, to 
correct Bat Sheva in the property of mercy, she was joined with Uriah. As a 
result, she became fit for queenship, and became the Queen of Israel. 

133. Domeh said to Him: “Master of the World, what is revealed to You is 
concealed from him.” The Creator answered: “Whatever David did was done 
with My permission. For no man goes to war without first giving his wife a get 
(document of divorce).” Domeh then said: “But if this is so, David should have 
waited three months, which he did not.” The Creator replied: “This extension 
is only necessary to make certain that the woman is not pregnant from her 
previous husband. But it is known to Me that Uriah never went near her, for 
My Name is imprinted in him as testimony. Indeed, Uriah is Ohr- Iah, the 
Creator’s Light, though it is written Uriahu = Ohr + i + a + hu (Yod-Hey-V av), 
without the last Hey, Malchut, which proves that he did not use Malchut.” 

The letters Yod-Hey in Uriah’s name (Aleph-Reish-Yod-Hey) indicate that he 
had never touched Bat Sheva. This is because Uriah refers to GAR without 
VAK. And The Zohar emphasizes that whenever VAK is used, the name Uriahu 
is applied. However, it is written here that Uriah was Bat Sheva’s first husband, 
meaning that he had nothing of VAK in him, but only GAR—the Light of Hochma 
without the Light of Hassadim, for Vav signifies Hassadim. This is why he could 
not come near Bath Sheba. 

134. Domeh said to Him: “Master of the World, this is exactly what I have 
said: if You knew that Uriah had never laid with her, then who revealed it to 
David? He should have waited three months. And if You will say that David 
knew that Uriah had never laid with her, why did he send Uriah to his wife, 
saying: ‘Go down to your house, and wash your feet?’” 

Usually the readers of the Torah give this example of “a love triangle” as 
evidence of King David’s less than exalted qualities and of the inconsistency of 
the Creator’s judgment—how He forgave David for “killing” Uriah, and so forth. 
We must remember that the Torah speaks only of the spiritual worlds and their 
laws, which have no obvious consequences in our world. There is a cause-and- 
effect connection: whatever occurs in our world is a result of a Higher cause, but 
in no way is it vice versa, i.e., whatever is described in the Upper World does not 
necessarily need to manifest in ours. To consider the Torah a narrative about 
our world relegates the Torah of the world of Atzilut, the Creator’s holy names, 
the Creator’s Light, to the lowest level of creation, which is strictly forbidden: 
“Do not make an idol for yourself.” 




292 


The Zohar 


135. He replied to him: “Of course, David did not know, but he waited more 
than three months, as four months had passed.” As we have learned, on the 
15 th day of Nissan, David ordered all the people of Israel to prepare for war, 
Yoav—on seventh day of Nissan. They conquered the lands of Moav and 
remained there for four months, until he went to Bat Sheva in the month 
of Eltd. And on Yom Kippur, the Creator forgave him his sin. But there are 
those who say that David dispatched his orders on the seventh day of A dar, 
the troops assembled on the 15 th day of I yar, he went to Bat Sheva on the 
15 th day of Elul, and on Yom Kippur the Creator forgave him and spared him 
from death at the hands of the angel Domeh. 

Domeh is in charge of adultery. And since David was forgiven on the Day of 
Atonement, he thereby escaped death at the hands of Domeh. However, death 
was a consequence of Uriah’s death at the hands of Amon’s sons, as is recorded 
in the book of Kings (M elachim, 1, 15:5), “For David did that which was right in 
the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from anything that He commanded 
him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.” 

136. Domeh said: “Master of the World, I have nonetheless one claim 
against him: why did he open his mouth and say: ‘The Lord is righteous, 
for a mortal does so,’ thus condemning himself to death. Hence, I have the 
power to bring death upon him.” The Creator replied to him: “You are 
not allowed to bring death upon him, for he has repented and confessed: ‘I 
have sinned before the Creator,’ even though he did not sin. But he did sin 
in one matter—the killing of Uriah. I have recorded his punishment, and 
he had received it.” Then Domeh immediately gave up his complaints, and 
returned, despondent, to his place. 

The last letter Hey in the name HaVaYaH has two points—restriction 
(strictness) and mercy. And all the corrections of Malchut with the help of the 
covenant (circumcision) are intended to conceal strictness and reveal mercy. 
Then, the Creator’s name descends into Malchut. Even though Malchut exists 
there under the ban of the first restriction (strictness and judgment), and all 
the impure forces cling onto her, this point is nonetheless concealed, and only 
Bina’s property of mercy is revealed. Thus, the impure forces-desires, which are 
foreign to holiness and spirituality, are powerless and cannot cling to her. 

To violate the covenant means to reveal the strictness and judgment in 
Malchut (the letter Hey). As a result, the impure forces immediately cling to her, for 
this is their property—a part of them. The holy soul, the Creator’s name, thereby 
disappears at once, as it is written (Iyov, 4:9): “By the breath of God they perish.” 



The Night of the Bride 


293 


David himself is die part of Malchut related to Malchut’s property of mercy. 
Hence, he requires special care so as to prevent Malchut’s property of strictness 
from being revealed in him. For he who reveals the property of strictness and 
violates the covenant with the Creator, surrenders himself to the impure forces, 
which condemn him to death. This is because the property of strictness reveals 
itself within him before the impure force (the angel Domeh), who wished to 
cling to David’s soul and drag it to hell. 

Although he was innocent, David begged the Creator’s forgiveness for adultery, 
and received it. But with regard to David sending Uriah to his death, Domeh had 
no right to ask the Creator for punishment, as he is only in charge of adultery. 

137. And David said to this: “Were it not for the Creator’s help, Domeh had 
nearly claimed my soul.” “Were it not for the Creator’s help” means “had the 
Creator not been my guard and guide against the angel Domeh.” “Nearly” 
means that only the distance as thin as a thread remained for Domeh to drag 
my soul to hell. 

David is Malchut, of whom it is written (Mishley, 5:5): “Her feet descend to 
death,” for she is the end, conclusion of holiness (the spiritual). The impure 
forces originate in Malchut, and she sustains them, as it is said (Tehilim, 103:19): 
“His kingdom rules over all.” 

However, when Malchut exists in her corrected property of mercy (item 122), 
she is defined as consisting of two points: her own point of judgment and the 
point of mercy that she received from Bina. Her point of judgment is concealed, 
while the point of mercy is revealed. And thanks to this correction, all that the 
impure forces can get from Malchut is a Ner Dakik (tiny luminescence), which 
only sustains their existence, but does not allow for their spreading. 

Ner Dakik, the source of existence for the impure forces, is also known as 
Hoteh Dakik, a small sin, the root of sins, as it is written (Talmud, Sukkah, 52:1): 
“Initially, the impure force seems as thin as a spider web, but then grows as 
thick as a shaft.” And it is called small (Dakik), for judgment and restrictions are 
concealed within the property (point) of mercy. 

However, he who violates the covenant causes the point of judgment in 
Malchut to be revealed. As a result, the impure forces cling to Malchut and draw 
much Light from her, thus receiving the strength to spread and expand. And he 
who does so is said to be forsaking his own soul, as it is written: “By the breath 
of God they perish” ( lyov, 4:9). 

And when he merits returning to the Creator, he returns and corrects 
Malchut with the property of mercy. This is why this process is called Teshuva 



294 


The Zohar 


(return), from the word of Tashuv (to return) + “A,” where “A” (Hey) designates 
the Creator. In other words, it is the return to the property of mercy, whereas 
the property of judgment goes back to being concealed in the property of mercy, 
like a small candle, and nothing more. 

It is therefore written: WERE IT NOT FOR THE CREATOR’S HELP, 
referring to His acceptance of my return and repelling the angel Domeh by 
bringing Malchut back to her place (to the property) of mercy, reducing the 
property of judgment to a mere small candle, a hair’s-breadth fire, whose LIGHT 
SEPARATES ME FROM THE IMPURE FORCE. 

This is that minimal Light that must always remain between Malchut and 
the impure force, so as to allow Malchut to exist and be sustained by this small 
Light, called “small sin,” so small that DOMEH WOULD NOT DRAG MY 
SOUL TO HELL FOR IT. 

It is precisely the magnitude of this Light that saved me from the hands 
of Domeh, for had the property of judgment not returned to Malchut in the 
measure of a small sin, I would have fallen into the hands of Domeh. 

138. Therefore, man should be careful not to say what David said, for one 
cannot say to the angel Domeh that “It was an error” ( Kohelet , 5:5), as it was 
with David, when the Creator won the dispute against Domeh. “Why should 
the Creator be angry over your word” ( Kohelet , 5:5), i.e., for what you have 
said. “Destroyed the work of your hands” ( Kohelet , 5:5) i.e., the sacred flesh, 
the holy covenant, which you have broken, and are therefore to be dragged to 
hell by the angel Domeh. 

There are two ways to return to the Creator (“Introduction to the Study of 
the Ten Sefirot,” items 45, 59, 64; Talmud, Yoma, 86:2): 

1) Repentance out of fear, when intentional sins become unintentional, 

2) Repentance out of love, when intentional sins become merits. 

Before the end of correction, when the forces of strictness, restriction, and 
judgment are still needed in the world, as it is written ( Kohelet , 3:14), “The 
Creator hath so made it that man should fear Him,” Malchut must sustain the 
existence of the impure forces as Ner Dakik, so they will not disappear from 
the world. 

Therefore, at such a time (in this state), Malchut’s corrections are made in 
two points: mercy and judgment. However, judgment is concealed, while mercy 
acts openly. This is why the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil is feared: if 
man is worthy—it is good, if not—it is evil (items 120-124). 



The Night of the Bride 


295 


Therefore, DURING THE 6,000 YEARS, WE RETURN TO THE 
CREATOR ONLY OUT OF FEAR, which causes our intentional sins to turn 
into unintentional ones—errors. As a result of our repentance, we bring Malchut 
back to the property of mercy. But strictness and judgment are concealed in her 
to the extent of a small candle (small sin), since Malchut must still remain in the 
property of fear. Hence, this return is called “the return out of fear.” 

The small sin that must remain is also called “unintentional sin,” an “error,” 
a “mistake,” for it is not regarded as a sin in and of itself. Rather, it only leads 
man to commit an unintentional sin. Man sins intentionally only after having 
first committed an unintentional sin: he committed something unintentionally, 
but it turned out that he has sinned. 

Thus, this small sin remains in Malchut, but although it remains, it is not 
really considered a sin. Yet, through this concealed judgment and strictness 
we come to intentional sins. This is why it is said: “Initially, it is as a hair’s- 
breadth,” i.e., like a small sin. But then, unless we properly guard our covenant, 
it “becomes as thick as a shaft,” as the property of strictness and judgment 
becomes revealed in Malchut. 

It is hence said that Domeh stands at the gates of hell, as the power of a 
small sin is only an entrance, for it is said that it looks as thin as a spider web. 
Therefore, our repentance is called “forgiven sins,” which turn into unintentional 
errors, as though they were mistakes. For a small sin remains, which is capable 
of leading us to intentional sins. 

All this refers to the repentance out of fear, whereas the second kind is the 
repentance out of love, when intentional sins turn to merits (item 126). 

Therefore, MAN SHOULD BE CAREFUL NOT TO SAY WHAT DAVID 
SAID, i.e., not to utter the word that causes the property of judgment in Malchut 
to be revealed (as David had done). FOR ONE CANNOT SAY TO THE ANGEL 
DOMEH THAT IT WAS AN ERROR, for he is unsure as to whether he can 
return to the Creator right away, so that his sin would be forgiven and made 
unintentional, AS IT WAS WITH DAVID, WHEN THE CREATOR WON 
THE DISPUTE AGAINST DOMEH. 

It happened with David because throughout his life all of his actions before 
the Creator were pure, he had committed no crimes, and the only exception was 
his act toward Uriah. Hence, the Creator became his defender, and helped him 
return to Him at once, and his sin was turned into an error, as it is said in The 
Zohar (item 137): WERE IT NOT FOR THE CREATOR’S HELP, DOMEH 



296 


The Zohar 


HAD NEARLY CLAIMED MY SOUL. But other people should fear this angel, 
for an unintentional sin may lead them to hell at the hands of Domeh. 

DESTROYED THE WORK OF YOUR HANDS, THE SACRED FLESH, 
THE HOLY COVENANT, WHICH YOU HAVE VIOLATED, AND ARE 
THEREFORE TO BE DRAGGED TO HELL BY THE ANGEL DOMEH. 
The correction in us called “the holy covenant” is regarded as “the work of 
our hands,” as it is written: “Confirm the work of our hands.” The holy soul 
is called the sacred flesh, as it is said, “Out of my flesh shall I see the Creator” 
(lyov , 19:26) (item 131). Because of the revelation of the property of strictness 
and judgment in Malchut, the correction of the covenant was corrupted, and 
Domeh drags the soul to hell. 

Therefore, THE HEAVENS DECLARE THE WORK OF HIS HANDS 
(item 130). In the end of correction, the Heavens will declare the work of His 
hands, as the reward for all these corrections will be revealed. It will become 
clear that this was THE WORK OF HIS HANDS, and NOT OURS’, and THE 
HEAVENS DECLARE this. And the great Zivug RAV PAALIM UMEKABTZIEL 
will be made on these actions (corrections) (item 92). DECLARE refers to the 
Light’s descent from Above. 

Know that this is the only difference in our world before and after the end of 
correction. Before the end of correction, Malchut is called the Tree of Knowledge 
of Good and Evil, for Malchut is the revelation of the Creator’s governance over 
this world. And until people achieve the state where they can receive His Light 
(as He conceived and prepared for everyone back at the Thought of Creation), 
the world will be ruled by good and evil, by reward and punishment. 

The reason for this is that our Kelim de Kabbalah (vessels of reception) are 
impure, stained by egoism, which (i) prevents the Creator’s Light from filling 
theses desires, and (ii) separates us from the Creator. And the infinite goodness 
that He has prepared for us may only be received in altruistic desires, for these 
delights are not limited by the bounds of creation, like egoistic pleasures, in 
which fulfillment instantly douses the pleasure. 

Hence, it is written: “The Creator hath made everything for His own glory” 
(Mishley, 16:4), i.e., all the deeds in the world were initially created by Him 
so that we could please Him. Therefore, people in our world are engaged in 
things that are totally opposite from what they should be doing, according to the 
purpose of their creation. After all, the Creator clearly states that He created the 
world for Himself: “I have created it for My glory” (Yeshayahu, 43:7). 



The Night of the Bride 


297 


Yet, we claim the exact opposite—that the whole world was created for us, 
and we desire to swallow it whole, for our own pleasure, satisfaction, indulgence, 
and exaltation. So it is no surprise we are unworthy of receiving the Creator’s 
perfect goodness. And thus He rules over us through good and evil, in the 
form of reward and punishment, for one depends on the other: reward and 
punishment give rise to good and evil. 

Because we use our desires to receive (pleasure), thus becoming opposite 
from the Creator, we perceive His governance towards us as evil. This stems from 
the fact that man cannot perceive obvious evil from the Creator, as this would 
greatly undermine the creatures’ perception of the great and perfect Creator, for 
the Perfect one cannot create evil. 

Therefore, to the extent that man feels bad and evil, and denies the Divine 
Providence, a veil immediately falls over him, and the sensation of the Creator’s 
existence disappears. This is the worst punishment in the world! 

Hence, the sensation of good and evil in the Creator’s governance gives us 
a feeling of reward and punishment. This is because he who exerts efforts not to 
lose faith in the Creator’s existence and governance, even if he tastes evil in His 
governance, is rewarded with finding strength to not lose faith in the governance 
and good purpose of the Creator’s “evil” influence. But if he had not yet merited 
the opportunity to exert efforts in believing that the Creator pursues a definite 
purpose by sending him unpleasant sensations, he is punished with remoteness 
from faith in the Creator and the sensation of His existence. 

Therefore, although He has done, is doing, and will do all the deeds in the 
world, it remains semi-concealed from those who perceive both good and evil. 
For when they perceive evil, the impure force is allowed to conceal the Creator’s 
governance and faith in Him. Thus, man suffers the worst punishment in the 
world—the sensation of detachment from the Creator—and becomes filled with 
doubts and denial of the Creator’s existence and governance. And when he 
returns to the Creator, he receives a corresponding reward, and is able to unite 
with Him once again. 

But through this very governance of reward and punishment, the Creator 
has prepared for us the opportunity to utilize this governance in order to achieve 
the end of correction, when all people attain their corrected Kelim (desires), and 
use them to bring pleasure to the Creator, as it is written that He has created 
everything for Himself! In other words, our bestowal must be absolute. 

Then the great Z ivug of At ik will be revealed, we will all return to the Creator 
out of love, all our intentional sins will turn to merits, all evil will be felt as 



298 


The Zohar 


infinite goodness, and His Divine Providence will be revealed in the entire 
world. Thus, ALL SHALL SEE drat only He has done, is doing, and will do all 
die deeds in the world, and that no one acts besides Him. After the sensation of 
evil and punishment is turned to one of goodness and reward, and our egoistic 
desires become altruistic, we are given the opportunity to attain the Maker, for 
we conform to the work of His hands by blessing and exalting Him above all evil 
and all punishments we had once suffered. 

However, die most important point to stress here is that until the end 
of correction, all die corrections were considered as THE WORK OF OUR 
HANDS. This is why we receive rewards or punishments for them. But in the 
great Zivug at the end of correction, it will be revealed that all the corrections 
and all the punishments are THE WORK OF HIS HANDS. 

Thus, it is said, THE HEAVENS DECLARE THE WORK OF HIS HANDS. 
This is because the great Zivug signifies what the Heavens will declare, that all 
the deeds are the work of His hands, that He has done, is doing, and will do all 
the deeds in the whole of creation. 

139. Thus, “the Heavens declare the work of His hands.” These are the friends 
who have united in the bride (M alchut) by studying the Torah on the night 
of the holiday of Shavuot. They are all participants of the covenant with her, 
and are called “the work of His hands.” And she praises and notes each and 
every one of them. What is Heaven, firmament? It is the firmament, where 
the sun, the moon, the stars, and the zodiac are located. This firmament is 
called the Book of Remembrance, and it declares and records them, so they 
shall become the sons of His palace, and He will fulfill all their desires. 

Yesod of Zeir Anpin, onto which a Zivug is made for the revelation of all 
the Supernal Degrees, called the sun, the moon, the stars, and the signs of the 
zodiac, is referred to as the “firmament.” All of the Supernal stars exist on the 
firmament, called Yesod of Zeir Anpin. And everything exists thanks to it, for it 
makes a Zivug with Nukva, called earth, and shines upon her with all these stars, 
i.e., gives these stars to her. 

It turns out that Malchut is smaller than the sun (ZA). But at the end of 
correction, the light of the moon will be as the light of the sun, and the light 
of the sun will be seventy times greater than before—Malchut will become as 
big as Zeir Anpin during the six days of creation. When will this be? Rabbi 
Yehuda answers: on the day when death disappears forever, and the Creator 
and His Name are as one. 



The Night of the Bride 


299 


The Heaven or the firmament (ZA) is HaVaYaH, called “the sun.” Malchut 
(Nukva ) receives from it, and is called “the moon.” During the 6,000 years, 
Malchut receives the Light from the six days of creation, but Zeir Anpiri does not 
reveal that the Creator and His Name are one. Hence, the moon is smaller than 
the sun. Its lesser size is a result of Malchut’s consisting of both good and evil, 
reward and punishment. 

There is a considerable difference between “Him” and “His Name.” “His 
Name” is Malchut, where all the Zivugim, and all the states of unification and 
separation are accumulated. But at the end of correction, when death is said to 
disappear forever, HaVaYaH and His Name will be one. The Name ( Malchut) 
will be like the Light of Zeir Anpin— only goodness without evil, and the private 
governance will be revealed in her, which means that the light of the moon will 
become equal to that of the sun. 

Therefore at this time (in this state), Nukva will be called “the Book of 
Remembrance,” for all human deeds are recorded in her. Yesod of Zeir Anpin is 
called “remembrance,” for it remembers the deeds of the entire world, studies, 
and analyzes all the creatures that receive from it. 

During the 6,000 years before the end of correction, the Book of 
Remembrance exists sometimes together and sometimes separately. But at the 
end of correction, these two degrees will merge into one, and Malchut herself 
will be called “the Book of Remembrance,” when ZA and Malchut become a 
single whole, for Malchut’s Light will equal that of ZA. 

Therefore, the firmament is a place where the sun, the moon, the stars, 
and the signs of the zodiac are located. The firmament is Yesod of ZA, which 
emanates all the Light of the world and sustains all existence. It passes the Light 
onto Malchut when she is smaller than it, and the state, “He and His Name are 
one” has not yet been achieved. And at the end of correction, it will be exactly 
like Malchut, who is hence called the Book of Remembrance. 

Thus, when Malchut receives all the properties of Zeir Anpin (the firmament, 
called “Remembrance”), she will become the Book of Remembrance, i.e., she 
and the firmament will be one. 

140. Day after day brings Omer-a sheaf. The holy day out of those days 
(Sefirot) of the King (Zeir Anpin) praises the friends, who study the Torah 
on the night of Shavuot. They say to each other, “Day after day shall bring 
a sheaf,” and praise it. And the words “night after night” refer to all the 
degrees, Sefirot of Malchut, that reign in the night, praise one another by 



300 


The Zohar 


each receiving from a friend, from another Sefira. And the state of complete 
perfection makes them beloved friends. 

Having explained that THE HEAVENS DECLARE THE WORK OF HIS 
HANDS is THE BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE. The Zohar continues to clarify the 
writings in the Book ofMalachi (3:14T6): “You have said, ‘How futile it is to serve 
the Creator! When we carried out the Creator’s will, and walked heavy-hearted 
before Him—what is the use of it all? And now we regard the wicked as blessed: 
they have settled in their wickedness, tried the Creator, and were liberated.’ Then 
those who feared the Creator spoke WITH EACH OTHER, and the Creator 
hearkened and heard, and a BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE was recorded before 
Him for those who fear the Creator (every day) and honor His (holy) name. 
‘And they shall become chosen for Me,’—the Lord said,—‘on the day that I shall 
determine, and I shall spare them, as a man spares his son, who serves him,—on 
the day that I shall work a miracle, on the day of the end of correction.’” 

Before the end of correction, before we prepare our desires “to receive” only 
for the Creator’s sake, and not for self-gratification, Malchut is called “The Tree 
of Knowledge of Good and Evil,” for Malchut governs the world in accordance 
with man’s deeds. Inasmuch as we are not yet ready to receive all the delight that 
the Creator prepared for us in His Thought of Creation, we have no choice but 
to submit to Malchut’s governance of good and evil. 

And this very governance prepares us for the eventual correction of our 
desires to receive ( Kelim de Kabbalah) into desires for bestowal ( Kelim de Hashpaa), 
thus achieving the goodness and delight that He conceived to bestow upon us. 

As was previously stated, the sensation of good and evil creates in us a 
feeling of reward and punishment. Therefore, when one tries to retain his faith 
in the Creator while he is feeling evil, but still continues to observe the Torah 
and Mit?;vot as he did before, he is rewarded. 

And if he cannot overcome this test and is distanced from the Creator, he 
becomes filled with doubts with regard to the good governance. Alternatively, he 
stops believing that the Creator governs the world altogether, or feels resentment 
towards the Creator in response to these unpleasant sensations. The Creator pun¬ 
ishes for all thoughts, just as He does for all actions (Talmud, Kidushim, 40:1). 

It is also said that one’s righteousness is of no help to him on the day of his 
sin. But sometimes man’s doubts are so overpowering that he regrets even the 
good deeds he had previously done, and says (M alachi, 3:14): “You have said, 
‘How futile it is to serve the Creator! When we carried out the Creator’s will, 
and walked heavy-hearted before Him—what is the use of it all?”’ He becomes 



The Night of the Bride 


301 


a complete sinner, who regrets his righteous past (complaining that he wasted 
time and effort instead of enjoying this world like the others!), and his doubts 
and regrets cause him to lose all of his good deeds, as the Torah warns us: 
“One’s righteousness is of no help to him on the day of his sin.” 

Yet, even in this state, man can return to the Creator. However, he is said 
to be beginning on his path anew, as though he is a newborn, for all of his past 
good deeds are gone. 

One should not take the aforesaid literally, even in its spiritual context, for 
he who works to achieve unconditional altruistic deeds constantly experiences 
descents and ascents, is filled with doubts, and tries to overcome them. Only 
one who advances in this manner feels that he is starting his work every time 
anew, that he understands no more than a newborn baby. Conversely, one who 
belongs to the masses—who works in his egoistic desires—is constantly filled with 
self-reverence and thinks that on each new day, he adds to the previous one, and 
nothing seems to disappear. This makes his spiritual growth impossible. 

Only one who truly ascends the spiritual degrees feels like a newborn baby 
before his Creator at each moment. After all, as he ascends from one degree to 
the next, the previous state (degree) disappears, and until he attains a Higher 
Degree, he is in total darkness and feels that he is starting from scratch, rather 
than supplementing his assets, which is how the spiritually inanimate (Domem 
de Kedusha ) feel. 

The governance of good and evil causes us to ascend and descend—each in 
his own way... Each ascent is considered a separate day (sensation of Light). As a 
result of the great descent that he has just undergone by regretting his past good 
deeds, man moves into a state of ascent, as one who is born anew. 

Therefore, at each ascent, it is as though one starts over on his path to the 
Creator. Thus, each ascent is regarded as a separate day, for there is a break (night) 
between these states. And each descent is hence considered a separate night. 

This is what The Zohar tells us: DAY AFTER DAY SHALL BRING A 
SHEAF—in each ascent we draw nearer to the Creator’s greatest day (the end 
of correction), HE PRAISED THE FRIENDS AND THEY WOULD SPEAK 
WITH EACH OTHER. This is because through the great Zivug at the end of 
correction, they will all merit returning to the Creator out of love, for the desire 
“to receive” will be completely corrected, and they will begin to receive only for 
the Creator’s sake, so as to bestow delight upon Him. 

In this great Zivug (unity), we will reveal all the supreme goodness and 
delight of the Thought of Creation. And we will then see with our own eyes that 



302 


The Zohar 


all those punishments we experienced in die states of descent, which made us 
doubt and regret the efforts exerted in the Torah, all those punishments would 
correct and purify us. And now, at the end of correction, they are the direct 
cause for our sensation and reception of the Creator’s goodness. 

Had it not been for the terrible suffering and punishments, we would not 
have been able to achieve the state of being filled with perfect delight. Therefore, 
even these intentional sins turn into merits, as it is said: DAY AFTER DAY 
SHALL BRING A SHEAF—each ascent in Malchut, up to the end of correction, 
is like a separate day. 

This day is revealed by the word, which supports the Torah in all its greatness. 
What is this word? When they say, “How futile it is to serve the Creator! When 
we carried out the Creator’s will, and walked heavy-hearted before Him—what 
is the use of it all?” 

These words brought punishments that have now become merits, for all 
the perfection and magnificence of that great day can now be revealed thanks 
to these very punishments of the past. Thus, those who uttered these words are 
now regarded as those who fear the Creator and praise His Name. (And these 
words could only have been spoken by those who made efforts to advance on 
the Path of Truth, and felt frustrated upon receiving uncorrected egoism of a 
Higher Degree. In other words, frustration comes only to those who truly work 
for the Creator’s sake.) 

Hence, it is said about them: “The Lord said, ‘On the day that I shall 
determine, and I shall spare them, as a man spares his son, who serves him,”’ 
for all the nights—states of descent, suffering and punishments, which sever 
their connection with the Creator—now become merits and good deeds. And 
the night turns into day, darkness turns into Light, and there are no divisions 
between days, and all 6,000 years gather into one great day. 

And all the Z ivugim that were made one after another, revealed the ascents 
and the separate, consecutive degrees, have now gathered into one degree of 
one great Zivug— Unity, which shines in the world from end to end. Hence, it 
is written: DAY AFTER DAY SHALL BRING A SHEAF, that is, the intervals 
between days now become magnificent glory, for they have been turned into 
merits. Thus, everything becomes the Creator’s one glorious day! 

And the words “night after night” refer to all the degrees that reign in the 
night. They praise one another, and each receives everything that man feels as 
suffering in a state of descent—this is called night. And through such sensations, 
intervals are formed between the sensations of day. 




The Night of the Bride 


303 


On the whole, each degree is separated from one another. Night is an 
aspiration to attain the Creator. And while each night is full of darkness, now 
all the nights (states of feeling emptiness, hopelessness, heaviness of efforts, the 
Creator’s concealment) gather together and form a unified vessel of reception 
of Supernal wisdom, which fills the entire earth with Knowledge of the Creator, 
and the nights shine like days. 

For each night receives its own part of Knowledge only by joining with the 
other nights. Thus, each night is said to help the other nights in the Knowledge. 
Put differently, man is ready to receive the Knowledge only if he joins with the 
other nights. 

And since night is a feeling of lacking knowledge, attainment, and sensation 
of the Creator by uniting, they form a perfect vessel of reception of the Knowledge 
of the Creator. And they praise one another, for each has received his share of 
the Knowledge of the Creator thanks exclusively to his friend, through uniting 
with him. Only in unity do they merit reception of the Supernal Knowledge. 
Hence, it is said that through the perfection achieved by all, the nights became 
beloved friends. 

141. Does he speak of the others in the world who do not obey the Creator, 
and whom He does not wish to hear? But they made lines through all the 
earth, that is, these things make a line out of those that reside Above and out 
of those that reside below. From the first—firmaments are made, and from the 
second, from their return—earth. And should you say that they revolve around 
the earth in one place, it is said that they are also at the end of the world. 

Thus far, we have discussed the most terrible punishments and suffering in 
the world—being detached from the Creator and losing faith in Him. Moreover, 
The Zohar tells us that all the punishments, all the suffering of hell and of the 
body, which stem from personal sins and fill this world, also gather and are 
included into one great Zivug, as it is written: “And it shall come to pass, that as 
the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the Lord will 
rejoice over you to cause you to perish, and to destroy you” ( Devarim , 28:63). 

All will gather and become one great Light, and everything will turn to 
great joy and bliss. It is therefore said that THERE IS NO SHEAF AND NO 
THINGS IN THE OTHER WORDS OF THE WORLD, which man perceives 
in this world as suffering. But they will turn to joy and bliss, and thus the holy 
King, too, shall wish to hear them. 

So, all the suffering during the 6,000 years will gather at the end of correction 
and will become a tremendous delight, as the prophet said: “In those days and 



304 


The Zohar 


in that time, said the Lord, even if die iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, there 
shall be none” ( Yirmiyahu , 50:20). 

Everything will turn to merits, so much so that they will ask and search “for 
the past sins that can be included in the Zivug, and which can be laughed at, 
for they were felt as suffering and now they are joy and bliss,” but they will not 
find any. There will be no more suffering in its true form, as it was in the past, 
although they greatly desire to find it and feel it, for all suffering will have now 
been turned to great Light. 

This Supernal Degree, created by the great Zivug out of all the souls and all 
the deeds, both good and evil, is now defined as a pillar of Light, which shines 
from one end of the world to the other. And this unity is perfect, as is said by 
the prophet (Zachariah, 14:9): “And the Creator shall be one (for all), and His 
Name one”—all the senses will grasp the Creator’s complete and perfect name, 
“the Infinitely good.” 

Precisely because this most Supernal Degree is achieved as a result of 
bringing together all the suffering and punishments, it fills the entire universe 
with Light, including earth. However, it should be noted that the suffering of 
which The Zohar speaks is not the suffering of the body’s lack of pleasure. It is 
the suffering caused by the absence of unity with the Creator! 

But if suffering is so useful, why is it written, “neither them nor the 
reward for them?” Suffering is necessary, for it is correction. However, the 
true suffering, for which man can receive the degree of the end of correction, 
is caused by temporary distancing from the Torah and Mitzvot as a result of 
feeling the pain of suffering, and this pains the Creator. Thus, the Shechina 
suffers, for when man suffers in his heart, he speaks ill of her, willingly or 
unwillingly. Although the Torah tells him to be patient, to endure and have 
faith above reason—selfless faith that all of this is the correction that he must 
undergo—he debases the Shechina by being unwilling to endure them and 
achieve the end of correction. 

Man’s soul is also a Partzuf consisting of ten Sefirot. In its initial, spiritually 
undeveloped, unborn state, the soul is defined as a point, as a potential future 
spiritual body. If man works on himself, this point within him gradually acquires 
a screen, and he makes a Zivug on it. He repels all the pleasures for the sake of 
the Creator’s desires, and receives Light in this point. Thus, he “amplifies” it to 
the size of a Partzuf and transforms it into a body, a newborn Partzuf. 

Afterwards he continues to cultivate his screen, gradually nurturing the 
small state into the big one, until he receives all of the Light destined for him 



The Night of the Bride 


305 


by the Creator within his spiritual body. This state is called “the end of the 
personal correction.” When all the personal corrections merge into one, the 
general correction of the entire world (of Malchut ) will occur. Malchut is a Partzuf 
that consists of separate souls; each soul, the Partzuf of each soul, is part of 
Malchut, and Malchut is a collection, the sum of all the Partzufim that are to be 
made by all the people. To make a Partzuf is to acquire a screen and become 
filled with Light. 

THOSE THAT RESIDE ABOVE AND THOSE THAT RESIDE BELOW 
refers to the order of time in the spiritual, eternal world, which is different from 
ours. When the Creator wished to create the world, He immediately created 
everything: all the souls filled with Light in a state of absolute perfection, called 
“the end of correction,” where all the creatures receive the infinite delight that 
He envisioned. 

This ultimate state was born with the Creator’s first thought to create the 
world, and it exists in its final form from the very first moment, for the future, 
present, and past are merged in the Creator, and the factor of time does not 
exist in Him. 

All human progress is necessary only to enable us to imagine that the 
following is also possible: 

1. Change of time: the stretching of time into infinity, i.e., when time 
stops and the present merges with the past and the future; when 
time reverses its course or disappears. Yet, time is the only thing that 
provides us with a perception of existence. By “switching off’ time, we 
stop perceiving that we exist! 

2. Transformation of space: expanding and contracting of space into a 
point; space taking other forms, other dimensions; infinity and total 
absence of space altogether. 

I’ve already dealt with these issues in my book, Kabbalah, Science and the 
Meaning of Life, and I would prefer not to digress from the text of The Zohar. 
However, to understand our true state, and not the one we currently perceive, it 
is essential to remember that notions of time and space do not exist with regard to 
Creator. In reality, we are completely different and exist in a completely different 
form and state from what we presently perceive. We feel this way because our 
sensations are distorted by our egoism, which infuse our senses and possess our 
bodies, like a cloud. 

Therefore, all that is described in the Torah refers strictly to the spiritual 
realm. This information transcends time, referring at once to our past, present 




306 


The Zohar 


and future, for time exists only with regard to those who are still confined to 
their egoistic Kelim (desires). From this we can understand what is said in the 
Torah: “The Creator showed Adam each generation and its representatives, and 
showed it to Moshe as well” (Talmud, Sanhedrin, 38:2). 

Yet, if the above described unfolded before the creation of these generations, 
how can the Creator show them to Adam and Moshe? It is possible because all 
the souls with all their destinies from the moment of their creation to the end of 
their correction emerged before the Creator in their completeness and reside in 
the Supernal Garden of Eden. From there they descend and enter the bodies of 
our world, each at their own “time.” And there, “Above,” the Creator revealed 
them to Adam, Moshe, and all the others who were worthy of it. However, this 
is a difficult notion, and not every mind is ready to grasp it. 

Therefore, The Zohar says ( Terumah , 163) that the way the six Sefirot of Zeir 
Anpin unite as ONE above Chazeh de Zeir Anpin, where they are free from the 
Klipo t, Malchut unites with Zeir Anpin below his Chazeh, so that unity exists 
below, as it does Above. For the Creator (Zeir Anpin) is One (male) Above. And 
Malchut becomes One (female), so that One (male) would be with One (female). 
This is the secret of unity expressed in the words: “He and His Name are one”; 
“He” (ZA) and “His Name” ( Malchut ) are within one another. 

The degree that is born at the end of correction, in the state of “He and 
His Name are one,” already exists Above as the sum of all the 600,000 souls and 
deeds during the 6,000 degrees (called “years”) in the world, which will emerge 
before the end of correction, but exist in their eternal form Above, where the 
future is as present. 

Therefore, the pillar of Light that will shine upon the world from one end 
to the other at the end of correction already exists in the Supernal Garden 
of Eden, which illuminates it with the same brilliance that will be revealed to 
us in the future. This is because at the end of correction the two degrees will 
shine as one, and “He and His Name will be one.” A pillar (line) of Light will 
appear, made of those that reside Above (the souls that reside in the Supernal 
Garden of Eden) and those that reside below (the souls clothed in the bodies 
of our world). And “One receives One”; these two degrees shine together, and 
reveal the Creator’s unity thereby, as it is said that on that day “He and His 
Name will be one.” 

From the aforesaid one can assume that the pillar of Light that shines in 
the Supernal Garden of Eden descends and shines in the Garden of Eden of 
our world. But this is not so. Rather, FROM THE FIRST—FIRMAMENTS 




The Night of the Bride 


307 


ARE MADE, for this degree exits onto a Zivug of Yesod of Zeir Anpin, called 
“firmament.” Therefore, all the Zivugim that ascend above the firmament shine 
upon those that receive them from the firmament and below. The degree above 
the firmament is referred to as “Heaven,” and the degree that receives from the 
firmament is called “earth.” 

When the line (pillar) of Light unites the inhabitants of Above and those 
of below, the distinction between the Supernal Garden of Eden and the 
inhabitants of this world still remains. This is because the inhabitants of the 
Supernal Garden of Eden receive from a Z ivug above the firmament, and what 
they receive is called “the new Heaven for the inhabitants of Above.” And only 
a small luminescence, called “the new earth,” descends below the firmament to 
the inhabitants of below. This is what The Zohar says: “From the first—firmaments 
are made, and from the second, from their return—earth.” 

Although in this great Z ivug, as in all Zivugim, all that is decided above the 
firmament, above the Z ivug, spreads down to earth, below the line of the Z ivug, 
one should not think that this Z ivug (like all the previous ones) is merely a thin 
line of Light, called “one,” a limited, inner place, as it is written at the beginning 
of creation: “Let the waters gather together unto one place,” i.e., in the inner 
place of the worlds (and not the outer), a place of Israel. 

But the Light of this Z ivug revolves around the world and fills it whole. This 
Light reaches even the outer parts of the worlds (the nations of the world), as 
the prophet writes: “The earth shall be filled with Knowledge of the Creator” 
(Yeshayahu, 11:9). 

142. And since out of them Heavens were created, who resides there? He 
returned and said, “There is a shelter for the sun in them. This is the holy 
sun, called Zeir Anpin, and it dwells and resides there, and adorns itself 
with them.” 

143. Since Zeir Anpin resides in those firmaments and clothes in them, he 
emerges like a bridegroom out of his wedding canopy, and rejoices and races 
along these firmaments, and exits them and enters, and races toward a tower 
in a different place. He emerges from one end of Heaven, from the Upper 
World, from the Highest place, from Binei. And his season—where is it? It is 
the opposite place below, i.e., M alchut, which is the year’s season that forms 
all the ends and binds everything—from Heaven to this firmament. 

The Zohar speaks of the great secret of the sun coming out of its hiding. It is 
worth noting that Kabbalists often use the word “secret” only to explain and as 
if reveal the mystery in the passages that follow. The reader should nevertheless 




308 


The Zohar 


understand that there are no secrets in the world. Man attains everything from 
his degree. Even in our world, in the process of his mental development, man 
attains new notions on every new degree. And whatever he considered a secret 
only yesterday now becomes clear and revealed before him. 

The same is true with regard to spiritual attainments. Kabbalah is called a 
secret wisdom, for it is concealed from ordinary people, it is a secret to them. But 
as soon as one acquires a screen and begins to perceive the spiritual world, he 
sees the secret becomes a reality. And this process continues until he completely 
attains the entire universe, all of the Creator’s secrets (“Introduction to the 
Study of the Ten Sefirot,” item 148). 

The sun emerges from its hiding (sheath— Nartik), from under the Huppah, 
and rushes to a tower at a different place—after the great Z ivug under the Huppah. 
Zeir Anpin leaves his hiding and enters Malchut, called the tower of O z (strength) 
of the Creator’s Name, for Malchut then ascends and unites with ZA, and they 
become as one. 

The end of Malchut is called “the year’s season.” And until the end of 
correction, the impure forces, called “the end of days,” attach themselves to 
it. Now, after the end of correction, it is still necessary to correct this part of 
Malchut, called “the end of days.” To this end, the sun emerges from its hiding, 
LIKE THE BRIDEGROOM EMERGING FROM UNDER THE HUPPAH, 
and shines, and enters the tower of O z (Malchut), races and shines on all the 
ends of Malchut to correct “the year’s season” of the lower end of Heaven. 

For this last action corrects all the ends of Malchut and unites all from the 
Heavens to the firmament. In other words, Malchut receives the Light of THE 
END OF HEAVENS above the firmament (ZA). 

144. There is nothing hidden on account of the year’s season and the phase 
of the sun that revolves in all directions. And there is no concealment, i.e., 
not a single Supernal Degree is hidden from him, for all were bound together 
and everyone appeared before him, and none could be concealed from him. 
Thanks to him and thanks to them he returned to them, to the friends, in the 
phase of complete return and correction. All this year and all this time is for 
the Torah (to study it), as it is written: “The Creator’s Torah is perfect.” 

After the great Z ivug, a restriction was imposed on all the Upper Light 
(item 94). Therefore, a new Z ivug (TOWER) is necessary, which reveals anew 
all of the Upper Light that was concealed on account of the disappearance of 
the degree of BON, before it begins to ascend to SAG. Thus, NOTHING IS 




The Night of the Bride 


309 


CONCEALED FROM THAT PHASE OF THE SUN THAT REVOLVES IN 
ALL DIRECTIONS. 

Indeed, a Zivug between the phase of the sun and the year’s season corrects 
the ends of Malchut on all sides, until the correction is completed. Thus, BON 
ascends and becomes like SAG, which amounts to the complete correction 
of BON, whereupon THERE IS NO CONCEALMENT, NOT A SINGLE 
SUPERNAL DEGREE IS CONCEALED FROM HIM, for all the degrees and 
the Upper Light are once more revealed in their perfection. AND NOTHING 
CAN BE CONCEALED FROM Him, for all the degrees and Light gradually 
return to Him, until all become revealed. 

It is hence said that the revelation does not occur at once, for while in 
its phase, the sun travels and shines in sufficient measure for a COMPLETE 
RETURN, as it is written that He punishes the sinners and cures the righteous, 
whereupon they all merit the complete revelation of the Star. 

145. The word HaVaYaH is written six times, and there are six verses from 
“the Heavens declare” and until “The Creator’s Torah is perfect” (T ehilim, 
19:2-8). And this is the secret of the word BERESHEET, which consists of 
six letters: THE CREATOR CREATED ET (THE) HEAVENS AND THE 
EARTH, six words in all. The other sources of the verse from “The Creator’s 
Torah is perfect” and until “they are better than gold” (T ehilim, 19:2-8) 
correspond to the six utterances of the name HaVaYaH in them. The sources 
from “the Heavens declare” through “The Creator’s Torah is perfect” are for 
the six letters in the word BERESHEET, whereas the six names are for the 
six words from “the Creator created” through “the Heavens and the earth.” 

It is known that any degree born or revealed in the worlds is first revealed 
through its letters, which signifies the, as yet, unattainable. Afterwards, it 
appears in the combination of letters. This degree then becomes attainable, 
its contents become known, as previously described with the letters RYU = 216 
and AB = 72 (item 116). 

The six letters in the word BERESHEET contain everything that exists in 
Heaven and on earth, but in an unattainable form, and are hence designated by 
these letters alone, without their combinations. Then there are the six words: 
Bara Elokim Et Ha-Shamayim Ve-Et Ha-Aretz (THE CREATOR CREATED THE 
HEAVENS AND THE EARTH), where everything that the word BERESHEET 
contains (Heaven, earth, and all their inhabitants) is already attained. 

The same principle allows us to understand what is included in the six 
verses from “the Heavens declare” to “The Creator’s Torah is perfect.” This is 



310 


The Zohar 


just the beginning of the revelation of attaining the end of creation in the form 
of letters, as with the six letters in the word BERESHEET. 

And the complete revelation, the attainment of the end of creation begins 
with the verse “The Creator’s Torah is perfect.” This verse contains six names, 
each of which constitutes unique attainment, thus indicating that only after the 
completion of this degree do all the letter combinations become revealed and 
attained in the great Zivug at the end of correction, as it is said, NOTHING IS 
CONCEALED IN CONSEQUENCE OF HIM. 

This is why The Zohar says that THE WORD BERESHEET, WHICH 
CONSISTS OF six, IS WRITTEN (SPEAKS) ABOUT THIS SECRET. The 
word BERESHEET contains six letters, where Heaven and earth are concealed, 
before they become revealed in the six words, THE CREATOR CREATED 
THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH. 

The same applies to the six verses (Tehilim, 19:2-8): the great Zivug of the 
end of correction is not yet revealed from THE HEAVENS DECLARE to THE 
CREATOR’S TORAH IS PERFECT. Only after NOTHING IS CONCEALED 
IN CONSEQUENCE OF HIM are the six names revealed, which in turn reveal 
the end of correction in its full perfection. 

146. As they were sitting and talking, Rabbi Elazar, the son of Rabbi Shimon, 
entered. He said to them: “Certainly, the face of the Shechina has come, hence 
I called you Pniel (Pnei-face + El-Creator = the Creator’s face)” (item 119), 
for you have seen the Shechina face to face. And now that you have attained 
Benayahu Ben-Yehoyada, it certainly refers to Atik, the Sefira of Keter, just 
as everything else that occurred afterwards, as it is written in the Torah: “And 
he slew the Egyptian.” And he who is concealed from all—is Atik. 

It is said in the continuation of “The Donkey Driver,” who revealed the soul 
of Benayahu Ben-Yehoyada to Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Aba, as a result of which 
Rabbi Shimon called them Pniel. For the soul of Benayahu Ben-Yehoyada is a 
spiritual degree destined to be revealed in the future, at the end of correction. 
This is why they were in a state of concealment of the Upper Light (item 113), 
as was already mentioned with regard to the Zivug of the sun’s phase and the 
year’s season, until they have found Rabbi Shimon Ben Lakunya and others, 
thus meriting all the Light once again. 

Therefore, Rabbi Shimon says to them, YOU HAVE ATTAINED, 
BENAYAHU BEN-YEHOYADA WAS REVEALED TO YOU. This means 
that they have already attained the six verses, the essence of THE HEAVENS 
DECLARE, and exist in the six names. When they have attained the soul of 



The Night of the Bride 


311 


Benayahu Ben-Yehoyada wi th die help of die donkey driver, their attainment 
had not yet been revealed to them, as they still existed in the six verses—the 
reason for their concealment. But now they have attained and revealed his soul, 
that it is the great Zivug of Atik, when everything is revealed to all. 

147. The words, “He slew the Egyptian” are explained in another place, i.e., 
at a different degree, in a different way. He opened and said, “He slew the 
Egyptian, a man of good stature, five cubits high.” All of this refers to the 
same secret. This Egyptian is the one who is well-known and is described as 
“very great in the land of Egypt in the eyes of the Jew,” for he is great and 
honored, as that old man had already explained (item 99). 

The Torah describes the killing of the Egyptian in the book Shemot (2:12). 
As we have already learned from the article about Rabbi Hamnuna-Saba, it is 
expressed differently at a different degree (in a different language, the language 
of Divrey HaYamim). However, these two verses are the same secret, for it is 
written in the book Shmuel 1 (11:23): “And he slew the Egyptian, a prominent 
man,” while in Divrey HaYamim it is written: “And he slew the Egyptian, a man 
of good stature, five cubits high.” Both verses are the same secret, which The 
Zohar continues to clarify. 

148. This case was examined at the Divine Assembly. “A prominent man” 
and “a man of good stature” are the same, as they constitute Shabbat and 
the bounds of Shabbat. As it is written: “You shall measure it from outside 
the city.” It is also written, “You shall not impede limitations in measure.” 
Hence, he was a man of good stature. Precisely such, from one end of the 
world to the other. Such is he, Adam, the first man. And should you disagree, 
referring to the written “five cubits,” know that these five cubits extend from 
one end of the world to the other. 

The matter concerns the Divine Assembly, of which Rabbi Shimon said: “I 
saw those ascending, but how few they were” (Talmud, Sukkah, 45:2). There is a 
lower assembly of the angel Matat. However, the described above takes place in 
the Supernal Assembly, which will be clarified further. 

“A prominent man” is the degree of Moshe, of whom it is written in the 
Torah: “And there hath not since risen a prophet in Israel such as Moshe” 
(Devarim , 34:10), of whom it is written “My servant Moshe is not so; he is trusted 
in all My house; with him do I speak mouth to mouth, clearly, and not with 
riddles” ( Bamidbar , 12:7-8). 

“A prominent man” also constitutes a measure, which extends from one end 
of the world to the other. Moreover, its form and size correspond to Shabbat and 



312 


The Zohar 


the bounds of Shabbat, where the bounds of Shabbat are die end of its measure. 
During die 6,000 years, the bounds of Shabbat are limited by only 2,000 Amah 
(cubits). However, after die end of correction, die bounds of Shabbat will extend 
from one end of the world to the other, as it is written: “And die Lord shall be 
King over all die earth” (Z achariah, 14:9). 

As we already know, the Light can descend and fill the Partzufim down to the 
level of Parsa of die world of Atzilut. Shabbat is a spiritual state when die worlds 
of BYA widi all that inhabit diem rise above die Parsa to die world of Atzilut. 
Above Parsa are only pure forces, corrected desires ( Kelim ). Hence, naturally 
there is no need to separate pure Kelim from impure ones and to correct them 
during Shabbat. 

However, the Light of Shabbat shines not only in the world of Atzilut, but 
beyond its bounds as well. It thus affects the sixteen Sefirot from Parsa down to 
Chazeh of the world of Yetzira so the soul can be in the state of “Shabbat” with 
these desires, too. The language of our world describes this as the permission 
to transcend the bounds of the city of Atzilut (seventy Amah) by 2,000 Amah 
down to the Chazeh of the world of Beria, and then another 2,000 Amah from 
Chazeh of the world of Beria to Chazeh of the world of Yetzira. (Seventy Amah are 
regarded as being within the city limits.) 

However, after all the Kelim (desires) are corrected, there will be no 
restrictions; the world of Atzilut will extend down to our world, and only the 
state of Shabbat will prevail in the entire world—in all desires of all creatures. 

It is hence written: A PROMINENT MAN and A MAN OF GOOD 
STATURE are one and the same, for they constitute Shabbat and the bounds 
of Shabbat, as is said: AND YOU SHALL MEASURE FROM OUTSIDE THE 
CITY, and it is also written: YOU SHALL NOT IMPEDE JUDGMENT IN 
MEASURE. It follows that an object’s measure represents its limit, just as 
the words A MAN OF GOOD STATURE alludes to the end, the bounds of 
Shabbat after the end of correction, which will extend from one end of the 
world to the other. 

AND HE SHALL BE PRECISELY MAN OF GOOD STATURE indicates 
that size does not rule over him; rather, he rules over size, and it is he who 
determines this size according to his own will. SUCH IS HE, ADAM, who, 
prior to his sin, extended and shone from one end of the world to the other 
(Talmud, Hagigah, 12:1), as the bounds of Shabbat after the end of correction. 

FIVE CUBITS FROM ONE END OF THE WORLD TO THE OTHER- 
because the five cubits are the five Sefirot: Keter, Hochma, Bina, ZA, and Malchut 



The Night of the Bride 


313 


that expand and fill everything from one end of the world to the other after the 
end of correction. 

149. It is, as is written, “like a weaver’s beam” (Shmuel 1, 17s 7) “as the 
Divine staff” ( Shemot , 4:20) that was in his hand, which reveals by the 
secret name (Light) confirmed in it by the Light of the letter combinations 
that Betzalel and his disciples engraved, called “weaving,” as is written, 
“He filled them and others, and BOUND them.” And that staff—within it 
shone a secret name, inscribed on all its sides by the Light of the sages, who 
confirmed the secret name in forty-two properties. And the rest of what 
is written from here onward is similar to what the old man had already 
explained. Happy is his lot! 

The secret of the letter combinations in sacred names is called “weaving,” 
like a weaver joins his threads into a fabric, the letters join into combinations of 
sacred names, which designate man’s spiritual level of their attainment. Hence, 
The Zohar says that the Creator’s staff in Moshe’s hand had engraved the letter 
combinations of the secret name, which Betzalel and his disciples engraved as 
they worked on the Tabernacle. 

The Creator’s staff is therefore called a “weaver’s beam.” The Hebrew word 
for “beam” is MANOR (from OHR— Light). This refers to the Light of the letter 
combinations in the secret name, which Betzalel weaved and engraved, as it is 
said, “by the Light of the letter combinations that Betzalel engraved.” 

However, the staff does not shine in all directions until the end of correction, 
for there is a distinction between the Creator’s staff and that of Moshe. It is 
written of the staff of Moshe: “Put forth your hand and take it by the tail (of a 
snake), and it shall become a staff in your hand” ( Shemot , 4:4). This means that 
it did not shine from all sides. 

However, after the end of correction, it will shine in all directions, as it is 
said: “And the secret name shone from within that staff in all directions by the 
Light of sages, who confirmed the secret name in forty-two properties.” For the 
secret name that was engraved on the staff shone in all directions, i.e., in the 
property called “He will eradicate death forever” (Yeshayahu, 25:8). It will thus 
begin to shine evenly in all directions, whereas the Light of the name engraved 
on the staff is the Light of Hochma of the Name MB. 

150. Be seated, dear friends. Be seated and let us renew the correction of the 
Bride on this night, for whomever joins her on this night shall be guarded 
Above and below in the coming year. And this year shall pass over him in 
peace. Such people are described in the verse: “The angel of the Lord stands 



314 


The Zohar 


round those that fear Him, and delivers them. O taste and see that the Creator 
is good” ( Tehilim, 34:8-9). 

As was already stated in item 125, there are two explanations of the aforesaid. 
The first is that since the day of the giving of the Torah is the Light of the end 
of correction that abolishes death forever and brings freedom from the angel of 
death, one should exert to receive this Light on the day of Shavuot (Pentecost), as 
Light is renewed on the holiday and brings deliverance from death. 

According to the second explanation, Malchut is called a “year,” and the 
renewal of the Light by those who keep the Torah after the end of correction 
will also bring the complete and final correction of the year (Malchut). This is 
because the renewal of the Light by those who keep the Torah is referred to as 
the correction of the night of the bride, Malchut, called a “year.” And this brings 
us to a corrected year. 



Heaven and Earth 


151. Rabbi Shimon opened and said, “In the beginning the Creator created 
the Heavens and the earth.” This verse should be examined carefully, for 
whoever claims that there is another Creator disappears from the world, as it is 
written, “He who claims that there is another Creator perishes from both the 
earth and from Heavens, for there is no other Creator, but the Almighty.” 

Here The Zohar continues to discuss the correction of the bride. It starts 
with the first sentence of the Torah: IN THE BEGINNING THE CREATOR 
CREATED, with the root and the source of all the corrections of the bride 
(Malchut) during the 6,000 years. 

Malchut’s entire correction occurs only through her union with Bina and 
the reception of Bina’s properties. In the verse, IN THE BEGINNING THE 
CREATOR CREATED, the Creator is called Elokim, signifying Bina. This means 
that He created the world by the property of Bina for the purpose of correction. 

Elokim consists of MLBina and ELEH-Malchut. Thanks to the constant 
union of MI and ELEH, the world can exist. The Creator is Bina, called Elokim, 
and as a result of Ohr Hochma clothing in O hr Elassadim, the union of MI and 
ELEH provides ELEH with the property of Bina. It is through this correction 
that the world is able to exist. 

The union of MI and ELEH does not permit for the existence of other, 
foreign, egoistic forces within the Partzuf. These are the so-called “other gods,” 
who cannot sustain the world, as they separate MI from ELEH and do not clothe 
the Light of pleasure ( Hochma ) in the altruistic intention of Hassadim (for the 
Creator’s sake), which leads to Ohr Hochma departing the Partzuf, leaving ELEH. 
Therefore, it is forbidden to believe that man is governed by any other forces 
besides the Creator, for instead of existence and reception of the Light of Life, 
such belief brings the world and man only ruin and disappearance of this Light. 


315 



316 


The Zohar 


152. With the exception of ELEH, everything is written in Aramaic. This is 
called “translation.” He asks: However, should you suggest that it is because 
the holy angels do not understand the translation, i.e., the Aramaic language, 
then everything should have been said in Hebrew, so the holy angels would 
hear and be grateful for it. He replies: This is exactly why it is written in the 
translation (in Aramaic), as the holy angels neither hear nor understand it, 
and hence will not envy people, which would be detrimental to the latter. For 
in this case, even the holy angels are called Creators, and they are included in 
the group of Creators, but they have not created Heaven and earth. 

Aramaic is referred to as “translation.” It is very close to the holy language of 
Hebrew, but angels neither need nor know it nonetheless. Yet, they know and need 
all the other languages of the nations of the world. This is so because the transla¬ 
tion from the holy language is called its “reverse side,” its VAK without GAR. 

In other words, there is an altruistic language, which is hence called “holy,” 
and its reverse, preliminary stage, hence called “translation,” is the Aramaic 
language. No other language in the world but Aramaic can act as translation 
from the holy language. All the other languages in the nations of the world 
(egoistic desires) are strictly egoistic and are unrelated to altruism. They are not 
AHP with regard to GE (the holy language). 

Therefore, the translation is truly close to the holy language. However, 
there is one distinction here, which renders it unnecessary to angels: the holy 
language is like the scale pointer that shows the extent of balance between 
the right and left scales, where the pointer moves between the two scales and 
delivers its judgment—toward the scale of reward (for merits) or towards the scale 
of punishment (for sins). It brings everything back to the state of correction, to 
purity and holiness, and is hence called the holy language (“Introduction to The 
Study of Ten Sefirot,” item 120). 

As it is written in item sixteen, Heaven, earth, and all that inhabit them 
were created by MA, i.e., Malchut, as it is written, “MA = WHAT = HOW 
glorious is Your name in all the earth, which You have set above the Heavens!” 
Indeed, Heaven was created by the name (property) of MA (Malchut), whereas 
the Heaven that is mentioned alludes to Bina, called MI. But all is explained by 
the name Elokim. 

The name Elokim is revealed in Heaven and earth, which were created by the 
power of MA, by attaching the letters ELEH from Ima-Bina with the help of MAN 
and good deeds of the lower ones. Therefore, the Light of GAR, i.e., Ohr Hochma, 
called Elokim, is consistent neither in Heaven (Bina) nor on earth (ZON). 



Heaven and Earth 


317 


Typically, only GE are present above the Pcirsa, in ZON of the world of 
Atzilut, whereas their AHP is below the Parsa, in the worlds BYA, for ZON 
themselves are unwilling to receive O hr Hochma unless it is to be passed on to 
the Partzufim— the souls of the righteous—in the worlds of BYA. 

When the lower ones, the righteous that exist spiritually in the worlds of BYA, 
raise MAN from below upwards, from their place in BYA to Malchut de Atzilut, 
MA turns into MI and the letters ELEH join with MI. Together, they create the 
word Elokim, which is the Light of Heaven and earth. However, if the lower ones 
corrupt their deeds by sinking into egoistic intentions, the Light disappears and 
leaves Sefirot K-H with the Light Ruach'Nefesh (called MI or MA), while the letters 
ELEH fall into the impure forces, for MI is GE and ELEH is AHP. 

Therefore, the entire correction depends exclusively on attaching the letters 
ELEH to MI with the help of MAN. Hence, this correction is called the “holy 
language,” like the scale pointer, which determines the balance between egoistic 
desires and altruistic intentions, i.e., the reception for the Creator’s sake. This is 
why the scale pointer is set in the middle, and by means of such interaction of 
the properties of Malchut (the will to receive) and Bina (the will to bestow), one 
can achieve the reception of O hr Hochma for the Creator’s sake. 

The Light is called “holy,” as it passes the holy name Elokim to ZON, descends 
from Bina to ZON, and transfers the letters ELEH to the pure and holy side, to 
the scale of merit. This is why the Hebrew word for “scales” is Mawznaim (from 
the word Awzen), for the Light in AHP ( Awzen-Hotem-Peh ) is named according to 
its highest Light, the Light of Awzen of the Sefira Bina or Ohr Neshama. 


Keter 

Hochma 

- Galgalta 

- Eynaim 

- Forehead/Skull 

- eyes 

- Yechida ) 

- Haya J 

\ GE 

Bina 

- Awzen 

- ear 

- Neshama > 


ZA 

- Hotem 

- nose 

- Ruach 

| 

AHP 

Malchut 

- Peh 

- mouth 

- Nefesh ; 

1 


And the language of translation called Targum is opposite to the holy 
language of M awznaim (scales). It is so because when the lower ones do not raise 
MAN and do not harbor pure intentions, it is defined as an aspiration to use 
only the desires to receive, designated by the letters ELEH, and which do not 
aspire to unite with the desire (property) of bestowal (the letters M LBina). As a 




318 


The Zohar 


result, AHP of ZON, called MA, descend and Heaven and earth (ZON) return 
to the state of VAK. 

Such a state is called the language of T'argum. The Gematria of the word 
Tardema (sleep) matches that of the word Targum. In Hebrew, the word T 'argum is 
spelled with the same letters as the words Tbed MA, which means “descending 
MA,” for through this spiritually impure language, AHP = MA (designated 
by the words Tered MA) becomes revealed. This leads to the descent from the 
scale of merit to the scale of punishment. While this is happening, the state 
of GE is called “sleep.” 

However, all this refers only to ZON, to Heaven and earth created in MA, 
the desires of reception. This is because they have emerged as a result of a Zivug 
on Yesod, called MA. But the holy angels that emerged from the Zivug de Neshikin 
(kissing Zivug) of AVI, and which have only MI but no MA (only altruistic desires 
of bestowal, the property of lMA-Bina), permanently exist in the state of VAK 
without GAR, that is, without Ohr Hochma. 

On the other hand, their VAK is Ohr Hassadim of MI = Ima-Bina. Ohr 
Hassadim in Bina is as important as GAR, for it fills desires with just as perfect 
a sensation as does the GAR, to the point that they reject Ohr Hochma, just like 
Ima. And there is holiness in them; hence, GAR are called holy, as well. 

There are two reasons why angels do not respond to the language of Targum, 
which adds MA to ZON and returns ZON to the state of VAK: 

1. Even when ZON are in the state of GAR due to the influence of the 
holy language, angels do not receive GAR ( Hochma) from it, as, just 
like Ima, they want only Ohr Hassadim. 

2. The addition of the Achoraim (AHP) does not apply to angels whatsoever; 

they lack the properties of MA. Hence, The Zohar says that THE HOLY 
ANGELS HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO NEED for translation AND 
DO NOT LISTEN to it. They do not need it because they neither 
lose anything when it is present nor gain anything when it is absent, 
as they constitute the property of VAK and lack the property of MA. 

AND THEY SHALL NOT ENVY MAN—this sentence refers primarily to 
the damnation of other gods, the forces that prevent man from revealing GAR, 
Ohr Hochma. As a result, he loses the Light and the letters ELEH, for angels do 
not have the properties of GAR de Hochma either, but only GAR de Hassadim. 
Thus, they feel ashamed of their descent to such a low degree, and envy us for 
considering ourselves significant. 



Heaven and Earth 


319 


The Zohar says that in this case, even the holy angels are called “Creators,” 
but they have not created Heaven and earth and are called “Creators-Eiokim” 
(forces) because they come from lma-Bina (called Elokim), thus existing in the 
general Elokim. But THEY HAVE NOT CREATED HEAVEN AND EARTH, 
for they cannot uphold the existence of Heaven and earth in GAR de Hochma. 
However, Heaven and earth (the correction of the world to its ultimate merging 
with the Creator) cannot exist unless man settles there (man must consist of 
egoistic and altruistic desires) and sows and reaps (corrects his egoistic desires by 
uniting with the properties of Bina). This existence is possible only in the Light 
of GAR de Hochma (the reception of Ohr Hochma for the Creator’s sake). Hence, 
angels do not create Heaven and earth. 

153. He asks: earth is called Arka, when it should read, A r’a. He answers: 
because Arka is one of the seven lands below, where the sons of Cain’s sons 
reside. Indeed, after being banished from the face of the earth, they descended 
there and fathered generations; wisdom became so lost that all understanding 
was lost, and this is a double land, consisting of darkness and Light. 

Each of the seven Sefirot (the six Sefirot of ZA and Malchut) contain the 
properties of the other six. Thus, each one of them contains the seven Sefirot 
HGT NHYM. In other words, Malchut, too, has seven Sefirot, and the lower 
world contains seven lands, as well, called Eretz, Adama, Arka, Gia, Neshia, 
Tzia and Tevel. 

Our land is called Tevel and is the highest of the seven lands. Arka is the 
third of the seven lands. The souls of Cain and Abel descend from the word 
Elokim, but due to the impurity that Chava (Eve), Adam’s wife, received from 
the serpent, the soul of Cain emerged first from the letters ELEH, followed 
by the soul of Abel, which emerged from the letters ML These two Partzufim 
were meant to unite and incorporate their properties in one another, which 
would make the name Elokim shine in both of them, as when MI is permanently 
present in ELEH. However, the impure force that emerged together with Cain’s 
soul incited him against his brother (MI of the word Elokim) to the point that he 
rose against Abel (MI in Elokim) and slew him. This is because the disappearance 
of the property of MLBina from ELEH is tantamount to murder. 

Without the support of the properties of MI, ELEH (Cain’s own property) 
fell into the impure forces: from the spiritual level of the holy land to the impure 
place (of egoistic desires). And he lost his descendants (Partzufim filled with Light) 
because of the rule of the impure forces (the disappearance of the screen). 



320 


The Zohar 


Thus, the holy language within him was substituted for translation, for he 
had lost the wisdom (O hr Hochma). After all, the impure forces lack wisdom, as 
they have only the Light of HB without Daat. 

The slaying of Abel, i.e., the exit of Light from this Partzuf (item 152), occurs 
because MI is formed in ZON exclusively by the power of MAN (raised by the pure 
thoughts of the righteous in the worlds of BYA). Then appear the letters ELEH, 
and the word Elokim becomes as complete in ZON as it is in AVI. Malchut ends just 
like ZA, like Ima, due to the replacing of the letter Hey with Yod (item 17). 

However, the letter Hey does not disappear from MA forever. Rather, it 
simply enters the inner part of Malchut and hides there (the will to receive 
receives its fulfillment from altruistic actions, from O hr Hassadim. Hence, its 
egoistic aspirations are temporarily unfelt, as they are concealed in Ohr Hassadim). 
Meanwhile, the letter Yod is revealed in MI. 

This is why the Creator’s holy name Elokim is also found in ZON, in Heaven 
and earth. However, Cain raised MAN not in holiness and purity, but wished 
to use the letters ELEH—which relate to him—for his own pleasure. This is 
described as, AND CAIN ROSE UP AGAINST ABEL, HIS BROTHER, for he 
put himself above his brother, to rule over MI (Abel). 

However, AHP of Nukva (the hitherto concealed letter Hey of MA) were 
immediately revealed, and the word MI disappeared from Malchut. Hence, 
Abel’s soul, which stems from MI of Nukva (MI fill the Partzuf with Light and are 
considered its soul) ascends and disappears as well, as is described by the words, 
AND SLEW HIM, for the Light’s exit from the Partzuf is referred to as death. 

This is why The Zohar describes this process in the following way: The 
serpent’s impure force was within Cain (Bereshee t, 2:4); hence, he wished to 
strengthen the letters ELEH, annul MI, and govern them. That is why he revealed 
AHP of Nukva (MA) and MI disappeared from Nukva, whereupon Abel’s soul, 
which descends from MI, disappeared as well (AND SLEW HIM). 

Thus, Cain himself (ELEH) fell under the rule of the impure forces, called 
Arka or Eretz Nod, as it is written in the Torah: “And he settled in the land of 
Nod” (Bereshee t, 4:16). 

The Zohar calls it a double land, one that contains both Light and darkness. 
This is because Light and darkness mix and act (rule) together, as there are two 
rulers in that land, who divide the power equally between them. One rules over 
darkness, the other over Light. Hence, in this state one is unable to separate 
Light from darkness, and only help from Above, the descending Light of reason, 
enables one to tell between the true Ruler and the lord of darkness. 



Heaven and Earth 


321 


154. And there are two rulers there—one rules over darkness and one over 
Light, and they become hostile to each other. When Cain descended there, 
they joined together and became complete. And they all saw that they were 
Cain’s descendants. Therefore, their two heads are like two serpents, except 
for when the ruler of Light defeats the other, the ruler of darkness. Hence, 
they enter Light and darkness, and become as one. 

We need to review item 14, which expounds on the creation of the holy 
name Elokim. First, the letters ELEH ascend and join MI to form a simple 
word, since O hr Hassadim is still insufficient, whereas holiness (O hr Hochma ) 
cannot enter the Kli (desire) without being clothed in Ohr Hassadim. Hence, it 
is concealed in the name Elokim. 

That is why a Z ivug takes place in MI— to receive O hr Hassadim, which clothes 
Ohr Hochma, thereby correcting the name Elokim: MI BARAH ELEH—BARAH 
is the source of Ohr Hassadim, which clothes Ohr Hochma, thus connecting MI 
to ELEH, which brings correction to the name Elokim. MI-Bina consists of GAR 
(AVI with the property of pure altruism), who never receive Ohr Hochma, and 
ZAT (YESHSUT), who do receive Ohr Hochma. 

Therefore, as the letters ELEH begin to ascend to MI, they first rise to ZAT 
de MI (YESHSUT), who receive Ohr Hochma, but are currently concealed in the 
name Elokim. Then transpires the second Z ivug on GAR de MI, AVI, altruistic 
desires, which provide ELEH with Ohr Hassadim, thus bringing correction to 
the name Elokim. 

AVI - GAR de Bina - Ohr Hassadim 

YESHSUT - ZAT de Bina - Ohr Hochma 
ZON 


Since ELEH lacks Ohr Hassadim, those deprived from Ohr Hochma are called 
Partzuf Cain. Not only did Cain fail to raise MAN to receive MI with Hassadim, 
he also wished to receive Ohr Hochma from AVI, thereby destroying the Partzuf 
named Abel, for the egoistic desires of AHP de Malchut of Atzilut were exposed. 
The Light disappeared from Partzuf Abel, signifying its death, whereas Cain 
himself fell into the impure forces—ELEH. 

The place of these impure forces is called Arka. Also, two rulers exist there, 
emerging from the impure ELEH: when AHP de MA in Malchut is concealed, 
while AHP de MI are revealed, they can pass the Light from the perfect, 
pure, and holy name Elokim to the souls. Ohr Hochma of ELEH (received by 


322 


The Zohar 


YESHSUT) then clothes in Hassadim (received from AVI), and the holy name 
Elokim becomes revealed. 

However, since the impure forces cling only to the AHP of the pure forces 
(to MA), the letters ELEH within them exist in two incomplete states: (i) when 
no Hassadim are present at all; (ii) when Ohr Hochma in ELEH cannot clothe in 
Hassadim due to die lack of Hassadim de MI; hence, ELEH are kept in darkness. 

This is the male part of the impure ELEH, as these Kelim are intended for 
Ohr Hochma. However, they have no Hochma due to the lack of Hassadim de MI. 
Hence, they are kept in darkness, devoid of both Hochma and Hassadim. Yet, 
these are great Kelim, for if they had been able to receive Ohr Hassadim, they 
would have been able to receive Ohr Hochma within it, too. 

The female part of the impure ELEH stems from AHP de MA of the holy 
Nukva, the Kli for Ohr Hassadim. However, the impure Nukva is considerably 
injured, as she is the basis for everyone’s remoteness from the Creator, as she 
impersonates the holy Malchut. Depending on the extent of her corruption, 
she has a multitude of impure names. Yet, she still retains a tiny Light ( Ner 
Dakik ), since her Kelim stem from AHP de MA, the roots of which are Kelim 
of Ohr Hassadim. 

These male and female parts of the impure ELEH are ZA and Malchut of 
the impure forces, the two rulers in Arka. The male part rules over darkness 
and the female part rules over the Light that is there. They complain against 
each another, since they are opposite. The male part complains because it is the 
Kelim of the letters ELEH, which are empty of Ohr Hochma; it hates the forces 
of remoteness from the Creator and forgery, existing within the Kelim of the 
female part of the impure forces, and prefers to remain in its darkness. 

Nukva of the impure forces, however, who has a small Light of Hassadim, 
does not aspire for Ohr Hochma, let alone for the darkness in which her male 
part abides. Therefore, she complains about the male part and distances from 
it. As The Zohar says, two rulers govern there: one (the male part) over darkness, 
and the other (the female part) over Light, and they are hostile towards each 
other, for the male part rules over darkness and the female rules over Light. 
Hence, they hate, slander, and complain against each other. And since they are 
thereby distanced from one another, they cannot expand their dominance and 
are incapable of causing any harm. 

However, after Cain had sinned and dropped the pure letters of ELEH of 
his soul into the impure forces of Arka, his ELEH, which are concealed from 
Hassadim, clothed in the tiny Light present in the impure forces. This revives 



Heaven and Earth 


323 


the small Kelim de Hochma in Cain’s ELEH, for the Light of the impure forces 
bestows life upon them, just like the pure Light of Hassadim. 

As a result, the male part of ELEH of the impure forces, too, made a Zivug 
with this Nukva, who clothed Cain’s ELEH, since he has these Kelim, as well. 
With the help of this Zivug, Cain fathered his descendants, the sparks of O hr 
Hochma that remain in the letters ELEH, which are not mixed with the male 
impure Kelim of ELEH that clothed in the Light of Nukva of the impure forces. 

This is why The Zohar says that when Cain descended there, everything 
merged and became complete, for the sparks of Ohr Hochma that remained 
in Cain’s ELEH were clothed in the Light of Nukva of the impure forces. 
Consequently, her male impure force wished to enjoy the sparks of Ohr Hochma 
that are in Cain’s ELEH. 

Hence, they made a Zivug, i.e., spread and completed one another, and 
everyone saw that they were the descendants of Cain, that this Zivug produced 
the descendants, the clothing of the sparks of Ohr Hochma in Cain’s impure 
ELEH. Thus, the sparks of Ohr Hochma of Cain’s soul were revealed, and 
everyone saw that they were Cain’s descendants, born of a vile Zivug. 

Therefore, their two heads are like two serpents, for they were born from 
a union of the male and female parts of the impure ELEH, which are initially 
opposite to one another. Therefore, Cain’s descendants have two heads, from 
the two impure forces: one craves the darkness of the desires to receive Ohr 
Hochma, and the other craves the Light within the impure desires of the impure 
Nukva. And the two serpent heads correspond to the two animals that belong to 
the system of the pure forces: the bull and the eagle. 

However, the two heads exist only when the male part is dominant, when 
darkness rules. Indeed, by clothing in the Light of Nukva in order to enjoy the 
small sparks of Ohr Hochma, the male part also supports (against its will) the 
dominance of its Nukva, for it wants her Light. As a result, their descendants 
have two heads: the first pulls in one direction and the second in another. 

Nukva of the impure forces does not need their male part whatsoever, as 
her male part exists in darkness and cannot give her anything. Therefore, Nukva 
dominates and prevails in her impurity, leaving nothing of the properties of the 
male part. Consequently, Cain’s two-headed descendants become one-headed. 

The Zohar tells us that the ruler of Light defeats the lord of darkness. When 
the impure Nukva, which has the Light, dominates, she defeats the male impure 
part, as well as the other male ruler. She defeats the male part, fully subduing it 
to her rule, and they include themselves in her Light and darkness, and become 



324 


The Zohar 


as one. Consequently, the rule of the male part (darkness) is included under the 
rule of the female part (Light), and the two heads become one. 

155. For these are the two rulers, called Afrira and Kastimon, who resemble 
holy angels with six wings. One has the image of a bull, and the other of an 
eagle. And when they unite, they create an image of man. 

The male impure force is called Kastimon (from the word Kosti, devastation), 
for it is darkness and is unfit for man’s life. And the impure Nukva, the female 
part, is called Afrira (from the word Afar, dust), and is unfit for sowing. She is 
called so in order to show that although she contains Light, she is insufficient 
for sowing the seed and producing harvest to feed human beings. 

The Zohar also says that she resembles holy angels with six wings, for the six 
wings of the holy angels correspond to the letter Vav in the name HaVaYaH. In 
contrast, there are only four wings in the impure forces, corresponding to the 
name ADN1, indicating the height of the impure forces with regard to the holy 
angels, opposite them. 

The Upper Light is called “wine,” bringing joy to the Creator and to human 
beings. However, wine residue contains Sigim or wine yeast. And from this waste 
emerges the foremost wrecker of the world, for he is still connected to purity 
(to yeast) and has the image of a man. However, as he descends to bring people 
harm, he assumes the image of a bull. This is why a bull is the first of the four 
main types of wrecker. 

Hence, The Zohar tells us that Kastimon is a wrecker in the image of a bull, 
thus indicating that it is the basis of all wreckers that are called “the impure bull.” 
It is the Sigim of the Supernal Ohr Hochma of the holy name Elokim, the impure 
ELEH that correspond to the pure ELEH of the name Elokim. For Sigim and 
yeast stand below it, but since it is still connected to purity, it has the image of 
man, for O hr Hochma of the name Elokim is T zelem (image and likeness) of man, 
of which it is said: “Be T: zelem Elokim—created man in image and likeness.” 

Yet, when separated from purity (altruism) through deterioration of its 
desires and, consequently, of its properties, it descends to its place (befitting 
these properties) in Arka, and assumes the image (properties) of a bull. And its 
Nukva assumes (in Arka) the form (properties) of an eagle, in congruence with 
her goal and action of Linshor (to fall out)—to bring about the fall of human 
souls under her power. 

Hence, the word Nesher (vulture) is derived from the word Neshira (fall), just 
as leaves fall from a tree, for the role of the impure Nukva is to seek people out 



Heaven and Earth 


325 


and bring them to a state of night and darkness, to the destruction of the holy 
covenant, as a result of which people’s souls depart from them (item 131). 

Therefore, The Zohar tells us: “And when they unite, they form the image of 
man,” i.e., if they return and unite with purity, existing as wine yeast, they return 
and assume once more the image of man, just as before they descended to Arka 
and became wreckers. 

156. When they are covered with darkness, they turn into a serpent with two 
heads, and move like a serpent. They soar in the void and bathe in the Great 
Sea, and when they approach the chains of Aza and Azael, they rile and rouse 
them and leap into the mountains of darkness, thinking that the Creator 
wishes to bring justice upon them. 

I suggest that the reader will try to comment on The Zohar on his own, 
without any help, and then compare his thoughts with those stated below. This 
way, we might understand what Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag has done for us with his 
commentary. Prior to the appearance of his commentaries on the books of the 
ARI and The Zohar, there was no way for us to understand Kabbalah correctly, 
and only a handful of people in each generation could climb the spiritual 
ladder on their own. 

Now, however, I assure the reader that simply by constantly reading even my 
books, which retell the compositions of the great Kabbalists, Rabbi Ashlag and 
his elder son and my teacher, Rabbi Baruch Ashlag, anyone can attain ascension 
to the Creator. I think that those who have already read previous books realize 
that this is truly possible! 

As The Zohar already mentioned in item 154, when the impure Nukva 
dominates man through her Light, the two heads become as one. However, in 
the darkness, when the male part, called Kastimon, dominates, they turn into 
a serpent with two heads, for the male part is unable to annul the power of the 
female part, as it needs to be clothed in her Light. Hence, the serpent has two 
heads. And they move like a serpent—aiming to bring harm (the property of the 
serpent), to tempt Chava to dine on the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge. 

By the power of the Rosh of the impure Nukva they soar in the void, which 
contains the root of the impure force, called “void” or the greatest fall, as it 
is written: “They ascended up to Heaven, they descended down to the abyss” 
(Tehilim, 107:26). By the power of the impure male part, they bathe in the Great 
Sea, in Ohr Hochma of the impure forces. 




326 


The Zohar 


Therefore, Ark a is called the Land of Nod, as it constantly sways from the 
rule of the two heads: those that reside there keep alternating between ascending 
up to the Great Sea and descending down into the void. 

The angels Aza and Azael are very exalted angels. Indeed, even after they 
had fallen from Heaven into our world, into the mountains of darkness, linked 
by a metal chain, so great was their power that with their help Bil’ani (Balaam) 
attained the degree of prophecy, of which it is written: “Sees the Creator’s 
presence” ( Bamidbar , 24:4). 

This is described as “falls and opens his eyes,” for Aza is referred to as 
“falling” because of his fall from Heaven to earth. And Azael is called “he who 
opens his eyes” with regard to Aza, at whose face the Creator throws darkness. 
And with regard to Bil’am’s prophetic degree, our sages have said the following: 
“There has not been a prophet in Israel like Moshe, not in Israel, but there was 
one among the nations of the world, and his name was Bil’am” ( Bamidbar-Raba , 
14)—so great was his prophetic degree. 

And the reason for their downfall from Heaven to earth lies in their 
complaints against man at the moment of his making. Yet, there were many 
angels complaining and objecting, so why did the Creator cast down only these 
two? The answer to this question can be found in items 416-425 of the chapter 
“Balak” in The Zohar. Briefly, it says that when the desire to create Adam (or 
man, since the Hebrew word for man is Adam) appeared in the Creator, He 
summoned the Supernal angels, seated them before Him, and told them of His 
desire to create man. 

The angels replied: “What is man, that You are mindful of him?” (Tehilim, 
8:5), meaning what are the properties of this man that You so wish to create? He 
replied to them: “This man will be similar to Me and his wisdom will surpass 
yours, for the human soul includes all the angels and Supernal Degrees, just as 
his body includes all the creatures of this world.” 

Therefore, at the moment of creation of man’s soul, the Creator summoned 
all the Supernal angels, so they would pass all of their properties and forces 
to man’s soul. It is therefore written: “Let us make man in our image, in our 
likeness,” meaning that man’s “image and likeness” includes all of the properties 
of all the angels. 

The words “image and likeness” are written in quotation marks, since the 
words Tzelem and Demut (image and likeness) are not mere words that simply 
describe likeness. Rather, they constitute very meaningful spiritual notions. 



Heaven and Earth 


327 


But the angels’ question should be interpreted as follows: “What kind of a 
creature is this man and what is his nature? How shall we benefit from passing 
(including) our properties in him?” The Creator replied to this: “This man 
will be similar to Me and his wisdom will surpass yours.” In other words, the 
Creator thus promised them that man will embrace all of their qualities (the 
properties of Tzelem), and that he will be wiser than them. However, because of 
their connection to him, they will also benefit from his great attainments and 
acquire everything that they presently lack. 

This is because the human soul includes all the spiritual degrees and all the 
utmost properties of all the angels. And just as his body includes all the materials 
and creatures of our world with all of their properties, so was the Creator’s wish 
that his soul would absorb the whole of creation within it. 

It is written in the Torah: “Yaakov and Israel shall be told of the Creator’s 
works ( Bamidbar , 23:23).” The sages have said that in the future the angels will 
ask Israel for things that they do not know themselves, for Israel’s attainments 
will be beyond that of the angels. Hence, all the angels took part in the creation 
of man and integrated all their properties within him. 

However, once man was created and sinned, thus becoming guilty before the 
Creator, the angels Aza and Azael appeared before the Creator with accusations 
“that man, whom You have created, has sinned before You.” For these words, 
the Creator cast them down from their exalted and holy degree, and thus, they 
began to deceive human beings. 

Of all the angels, only these two, Aza and Azael, came before the Creator 
to complain about Adam’s sins, for only they knew that man shall return to 
the Creator. However, Aza and Azael also knew that the harm brought to them 
by man’s sin will not be corrected by this return. Moreover, they would prefer 
man to not return in his desires to the Creator at all. This is why they were the 
only ones that complained about Adam’s sin, because from their perspective, 
this sin is incorrigible. 

The thing is that the breaking of the vessels and Adam’s sin constitute the 
same breaking, disappearance of the screen (anti-egoistic willpower or intention 
to act for the Creator’s sake). The difference is that the breaking of the vessels 
signifies the breaking of the screen in the Partzuf called “world,” while Adam’s 
sin is the breaking, disappearance of the screen in the Partzuf called “soul.” 
The difference between these two Partzufim is that the Partzuf called “world” is 
external with regard to the inner Partzuf called “soul.” The soul exists within the 
world and is sustained by it. 



328 


The Zohar 


The breaking has its causes and consequences. It is necessary for mixing 
all the properties of Bina and Malchut, and must transpire both in the spiritual 
world and within the soul, to impart the properties of Bina to Malchut, and thus 
enable her to correct herself. 

The breaking of the world of Nekudim led to the breaking of the eight 
Sefirot Hesed-Gevura- 2/3 of Tifferet and 1/3 of Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod-Malchut, 
four Sefirot H-B-ZA-M in each one that in turn consists of ten Sefirot, in all: 
8 x 4 x 10 = 320 (SHACH) parts. As a result of the mixing of all the parts, 
each part in turn consists of 320 parts. All of these 320 parts, called Nitzotzin 
(sparks), acquired the egoistic will to enjoy by receiving the Creator’s Light, 
which signifies their descent into the impure forces. 

In the spiritual realm there are no locations or departments of pure and 
impure. However, for the purpose of conveying information more vividly, we 
envision the reception of lower properties as a descent, the reception of more 
spiritual properties as an ascent, the attainment of equivalence of form as a 
union, and the emergence of a new property as separation. The appearance 
of egoistic desires in a spiritual object is considered a descent into the impure 
forces, although these forces exist within us (and not vice versa), and simply 
become more apparent. There is nothing surrounding us, for everything is 
within: all the worlds and desires, both pure and impure. 

By studying Kabbalah we attract the emanation of the Light that surrounds 
our soul (see “Introduction to The Study of Ten Sefirot,” item 155), which 
cultivates within us a desire for correction. Then, as we attain the degrees of the 
spiritual worlds, we begin to feel the spiritual Light that corresponds to each 
degree, through which we begin to discern egoistic and altruistic parts in each 
of our properties. 

By comparisons to the Light, we perceive our egoistic parts as evil, and to 
the extent that we sense it, we distance ourselves from it and refuse to use these 
desires. Conversely, we perceive our altruistic desires as good for us, but, having 
no strength to use them, we submit a request, receive the necessary strength, and 
accept the Light for the Creator’s sake, thereby ascending to a higher degree, 
where this process repeats itself. 

The return (Teshuva— repentance) means that by raising MAN (request for 
correction), we elevate some of the 320 corrupt parts from the impure forces, 
into which they fell, back to the world of Atzilut, where they existed prior to 
Adam’s sin. However, we are powerless to sort out and correct, i.e., to elevate the 



Heaven and Earth 


329 


thirty-two parts of Malchut herself, which exist in the eight Sefirot of this Partzuf 
(world), for their level of corruption is beyond our ability to repair them. 

Therefore, out of the 320 (SHACH = Shin + Chet = 300 + 20) parts, we can, 
that is, we are entitled to and must sort out and correct only 320 - 32 = 288 
parts ( RAPACH = 288) by our return to the Creator, i.e., 9 x 32, where nine 
designates the first nine Sefirot in each Sefira that we are allowed to correct. 
Yet, we are unable to correct Malchut of each Sefira, for this requires a Light 
of a special power. We will receive this Light from the Creator only after the 
correction of all the other 288 parts, that is, at the end of correction. 

These thirty-two parts of Malchut, which are impossible and thus prohibited 
to correct, are called Lev HaEven (Lamed-Bet Even—thirty-two stones). As I’ve 
repeatedly mentioned, there is no such notion as “prohibition” in Kabbalah; 
this word is used when it is necessary to point out the futility of trying despite 
one’s weakness and limitation. “Prohibited” means impossible, beyond one’s 
power. Moreover, it is not the Creator’s prohibition; rather, as a result of one’s 
personal faith and experience, one should admit that “prohibited” alludes to 
whatever is still beyond one’s power to correct. 

Therefore, GAR de AVI are concealed, and their Light does not shine. 
After all, for all of its ten Sefirot to shine, a Z ivug needs to be made on Malchut 
herself, for Lev HaEven, the thirty-two uncorrected parts of Malchut herself are a 
supplement to their ten Sefirot. And as long as these Kelim are missing, a complete 
Z ivug is impossible. However, when the complete analysis and correction of the 
288 (RAPACH = Reish + Peh + Chet = 200 + 80 + 8 = 288) Nitzotzin is completed, 
Lev HaEven will be corrected by itself, and no effort or corrections shall be 
required on our part. 

So the prophet says: “A new heart also shall I give you, and a new spirit shall 
I put within you; and I shall take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and 
I shall give you a heart of flesh” (Yechezkel, 36:26). Then AVI will receive their 
Light. However, this will occur at the end of correction, and before the end of 
correction, AHP of AVI will not be able to receive correction by means of our 
return, for we will be able to correct all of our egoistic desires, except for our very 
essence, Malchut de Malchut. 

These angels—Aza and Azael—are the real AHP de AVI that were destroyed 
during the breaking of the vessels, and were nearly restored before the sin of 
Adam. However, Adam’s sin destroyed them once more, this time until the very 
end of correction. 



330 


The Zohar 


Hence, both angels were complaining to the Creator about their Light, 
which has disappeared because of Adam, for they saw that there was no hope 
that Adam would correct them through his return to the Creator. Moreover, 
they saw that by his return, Adam had lowered their degree even more, for now 
the entire correction and return was limited to only 288 parts, without any 
participation or even mentioning of the thirty-two forbidden parts, Lev HaEven, 
which refer to the correction of AVI, whose Light is the Light of these angels, 
just as the Kelim of the true AHP de AVI are their Kelim. 

Each raising of MAN designates cutting off, separation of impurity—Lev 
HaEven—from the food, RAPACH = 288 Nitzotzin, the parts that can be corrected. 
It follows that by preventing Aza and Azael from participating in the correction 
of Lev HaEven, we lower them even more. This is why the two angels complained 
to the Creator and tried to impede Adam from returning. After all, his return 
lowers them even further, for the thirty-two parts refer to them. 

Therefore, when the Creator saw that their complaints threatened to weaken 
man’s strength to return to Him, He told them that Adam’s sin did not spoil 
anything for them. For although there is greatness and holiness in them while 
they are in Heaven and no impure forces can cling to them, still this perfection 
is incomplete, as they cannot exist in our world, in a place of impure forces. 

The Creator told them: “Hence, you have lost nothing as a result of Adam’s 
sin, for you are no better than him anyway, as your degree is merely the result 
of the place of your residence.” And since the Creator’s words constitute His 
actions, they fell instantly from Heaven to earth (into egoism, of course, not to 
the physical earth!). 

And since they came (spiritually descended) to the corporeal life (as 
Kabbalah defines it), they began to sort through and analyze the thirty-two parts 
of complete egoism, called the “daughters of men,” of which the Torah says: 
“And the sons of great (angels) saw the daughters of men (egoistic Nukva), that 
they were fair (they saw in her an opportunity for egoistic reception of pleasure), 
and they took them as wives (used their egoistic desires), whomsoever they chose 
(they themselves chose precisely this low state)” (Beresheet, 6:2). For they did not 
want to separate the impurity of the thirty-two egoistic parts and prefer only 
288, but took everything they wished, including Lev HaEven. 

Hence, they also transgressed with Nukva Lilit (Lilith) the sinner, and wished 
to draw the entire world toward sin, to fling it into the last stage of egoism, for 
they did not wish man to return, as it completely contradicts their root. 



Heaven and Earth 


331 


What did the Creator do? He put them in iron chains! For the Creator saw 
that if they had the power to return to Heaven after the sin, all the people would 
fail in their attempts to aspire to the Creator in their desires, as the dominance 
of these egoistic angels (forces) in man would be too great. (Rashi—the great 
eleventh century Kabbalist and Biblical commentator—says that the entire Torah 
speaks in the words of man. Hence, everything is described in notions of time 
and sequence of events. Similarly, the Creator seemingly creates and only then 
sees the results of his work). 

Therefore, although their root is quite high, the Creator gave the root of the 
impure forces His permission to act (here we see that the Creator governs all the 
forces in creation). This root is called Barzel (iron), as it is written: “There was 
neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in 
building” (M elachim, 1, 6:7), for iron is an impure force. 

And since this impure force clang to the two angels and bound them, 
as if with iron chains, by the desires that it dictates to them, such a state is 
characterized as being in the mountains of darkness, from which they can no 
longer ascend until the end of correction. 

And when they approach the chain of Aza and Azael, rile and rouse them, 
it designates the awakening of the fourth part of the will to receive, Malchut 
de Malchut, the greatest desire to receive, called “wrath and rage.” And they 
leap over the mountains of darkness, thinking that the Creator wishes to bring 
justice upon them, for being bound by iron chains, they could not ascend to 
their roots and receive Hochma. 

Therefore, this action is considered leaping, an attempt to ascend, followed 
by a fall, as a result of which they descend even deeper into the mountains of 
darkness. And they think that because of their leaps (attempts to receive the 
Light from their root), the Creator is becoming increasingly stricter with them; 
thus, they decide to stop leaping. 

However, even though they cannot give anything, as their attempts to reach up 
are mere leaps and falls, it is nonetheless enough for the two rulers to receive Ohr 
Hochma from them, as this gives them the strength to swim in the sea of Hochma 
of the impure force, whereas before they had only the strength to bathe in it. 

The reason for this is that there is no action in this exalted impure force, 
and everything is limited only in thoughts and desires, for such is the essence 
of the impure forces (desires) that separate us from the Creator—before the level 
of an action is achieved, purity disappears from it. Therefore, the impure forces 
will never reach the level of an action. 



332 


The Zohar 


Hence, the work for the impure forces is called Avoda Zara (alien work or 
idol worshipping), as it is alien to spiritual work “for the Creator’s sake,” and 
is performed according to the instruction and desires that the impure forces 
insert into man’s thoughts. In this alien work for an alien master, the Creator 
punishes even for mere thoughts and desires, as the prophet said: “That 
the house of Israel may understand in their own heart” ( Yechezkel , 14:5). 
And the sages have said that man is accused and punished even for thoughts, 
desires, and doubts in the alien work that transpires in his heart in exactly the same 
measure as for a completed action. Hence, the leaps of Aza and Azael are sufficient 
in their desire to receive Hochma, although in reality they received nothing. 

157. And these two Creator-appointed rulers swim in the Great Sea, fly up 
from there, and at night go to Naamah, the mother of witches, for whom the 
first people fell (Beresheet, 6:1-4). And they wish to approach her, but she 
leaps 60,000 Parsa’ot and assumes several different forms, so that people may 
be deceived and enticed by her. 

After receiving power from Aza and Azael, they can now make a Zivug with 
Naamah, as the first angels Aza and Azael erred. From that Zivug with Aza and 
Azael, Naamah gave birth to all the spirits and witches of the world. The Torah 
calls Aza and Azael the “sons of Gods” or the “sons of the great” ( Beresheet , 6:2). 

Yet, how could such exalted angels stoop to such depraved actions with 
Naamah, and why did she give birth to spirits and witches, and not to people? 

The thing is that the Upper World (AVI) was created by the letter Yod, by the 
male part, which have nothing of the fourth part of Malchut, called Malchut de 
Malchut. However, ZON (the lower world) was created by the letter Hey, which 
includes Malchut de Malchut. AVI aspire only to Ohr Hassadim, to altruistic 
actions (bestowal), for Bina emerged as such in the four stages of Malchut’s birth, 
even before the appearance of the first Kli (Malchut de Malchut). 

Nevertheless, ZON need Ohr Hochma, since ZA was created as such in the 
four stages of Malchut’s birth. Also, ZA wishes to receive Ohr Hochma within Ohr 
Hassadim, which he already has. 

The Zivug of AVI, called the “Upper World,” begets angels who desire Ohr 
Hassadim, just like AVI, from whom they were born. Human souls are born from 
the Zivug of ZON, called the “lower world,” and they, like ZON, from whom 
they were born, desire only Ohr Hochma. 

The moment the common soul of all the creatures (Adam) was born from 
ZON de Atzilut, ZON existed at the level of the Upper World (AVI) and clothed 



Heaven and Earth 


333 


it. Like AVI, they, too, ended in the letter Yod of the name HaVaYaH. And 
the letter Hey of the name HaVaYaH was concealed in their posterior side, 
A choraim or AHP. 

Hence, Adam’s level was quite high because ZON was in the Upper World 
and ended in the letter Yod. The level of ZON was that of the angels that were 
born from AVI; therewith, ZON received Ohr Hochma according to their desires, 
as ZON are meant to. 

As a result, ZON contain the name Elokim, Supernal Hochma, the perfection 
of the Upper World. This is because the ban of the first restriction to not receive 
Ohr Hochma does not apply to the letter Yod. Cain and Abel were born from this 
state: Cain was born from ELEH and Abel from MI. Malchut herself (the last 
letter Hey of the name HaVaYaH) was concealed in them both, and only the 
letter Yod was revealed; hence, they contained Supernal Hochma. 

However, on the whole, Hochma is received in Kelim ELEH, ZAT de Bina, 
by Cain’s soul. This property of Cain is concealed in MI, as the last Hey is 
concealed inside Yod, and Cain wanted to make a Zivug with it, to receive Ohr 
Hochma in Malchut de Malchut, concealed in Abel’s soul. 

It is by this that he slew Abel, for after the last Hey was revealed, the ban 
of the first restriction to receive Ohr Hochma in it was revealed. Hence, the 
Creator’s name Elokim disappeared from them both: MI, since it refers to GAR, 
ascended and disappeared (signifying Abel’s slaying), and Cain’s ELEH, since it 
refers to ZAT, fell into the impure forces, called Arka. 

However, although it fell into the impure forces, sparks of Ohr Hochma still 
remain in these Kelim (desires), as it is written that his daughters did not suffer 
from it greatly, and the sparks of Bina still remained in them. From this we can 
understand that Naarnah, one of Cain’s daughters, was the most beautiful of all 
the women in the world, for the sin transpired mainly in Cain’s male part, and 
not in his female part, as is described in the Talmud (Sanhedrin, 74:2). 

Therefore, after the Creator cast Aza and Azael into this world (created by 
the letter Hey), and they’ve seen Naarnah, a new hitherto non-existent desire 
appeared within them—the desire to receive Ohr Hochma, for in their essence 
they desire only Ohr Hassadim, and only the image of Naarnah bore a new desire 
for Ohr Hochma within them. 

And since there is no Hey (the last Hey, on which there is a ban to receive 
Ohr Hochma) in their essence and in that of Naarnah (the last revealed one, for 
it originates from Cain’s ELEH), they erred in her, thinking that she is able to 
receive Ohr Hochma, and made a Zivug with her. 



334 


The Zohar 


Their error was twofold: 

1. Despite the fact that they do not have the last Hey from birth, since 
the place determines, and they exist in this world, the last Hey already 
governs them, and they are forbidden to receive Ohr Hochma. 

2. They thought that the last Hey was absent in Naamah’s structure, 
when in fact, it was concealed. Hence, spirits and witches were born 
from their Z ivug. 

From this we can understand what is written in the Talmud ( Hagiga , 16:1), 
that witches are half-angels half-people, for with regard to their fathers, Aza and 
Azael, they are angels, whereas with regard to Naamah, they are like people. But 
she could not give birth to people, for the seed within her came from angels, 
and not from people. 

The reason for the harm that they cause lies in the fact that they were born 
from depravity, the greatest possible distance from the Creator. Hence, their 
impurity accompanies them and brings harm wherever it possibly can. Therefore, 
The Zohar says that at night they come to Naamah, the mother of witches, for 
whom the first people fell (see Beresheet, 6:1-4). 

Indeed, after they received strength from these angels, who were the first to 
engage in depravity with Naamah, they could continue to engage in depravity 
with her. The Zohar indicates that this is precisely why they come at night, for the 
power of Hochma of the impure forces rules only in the darkness of night, the 
time of judgment and restrictions, and also as the consequence of roots, namely 
Aza and Azael, who reside in the mountains of darkness. 

However, after engaging in depravity with them, she leapt 60,000 Parsa’ot, 
i.e., she rose so high that she wanted to annul the Parsa below VAK de AA, whose 
each Sefira is defined as 10,000; hence, its VAK = 6 Sefirot equal 60,000. 

But as soon as they think to approach her, she leaps 60,000 Parsa’ot, but 
immediately falls back down and is unable to touch them, for there is no action 
in these upper impure forces, and all transgressions and all errors are only in 
thoughts and intentions. 

Yet, there is still enough power in her to deceive and entice people, even 
if man does not reach the level of impure actions and is only drawn to her in 
his thoughts and desires. However, the Creator punishes for such thoughts and 
desires, as He does for actions, as the prophet warns us: “the house of Israel may 
understand in their own heart” ( Yechezkel , 14:5). And the impure force assumes 



Heaven and Earth 


335 


several different shapes, such as depravity with married women, murder and 
other things laid upon Lilit. 

158. These two rulers soar in the entire world and then return to their 
places. And they rouse the sons of Cain’s sons with a spirit of evil desires to 
beget children. 

“Soar in the entire world”—they bring harm to man in all of their thoughts, 
wherever they can, and lure him into the darkness of night. For after man sins, 
they return to their permanent place in Arka, where they rouse the sons of Cain 
to defile the descendants with impurities. 

Moreover, The Zohar says that besides pushing the sons of Cain to sin in Arka, 
they also soar in our world (Tevel), and compel the sons of this land to sin. 

159. The Heavens that rule there are not like ours, and the land bears neither 
seed nor fruit by the power of Heaven, as ours does, and the grains grow again 
only once in several years. Hence, it is written of them that they could not correct 
Shemaya and Arka, and perished from the Supernal land, called Tevel, where 
they will not be able to exist, nor rule over it, nor cause human beings to sin 
because of the night. Hence, they disappeared from Arka and from the place of 
Shemaya that were created by the name ELEH (as mentioned in item 14). 

Our Heavens receive the Light essential for the birth of subsequent Partzufim 
from ZA, which has Ohr Hochma. Hence, our land, which receives in Malchut de 
ZA, receives a grain and a seed. 

However, the Heavens in Arka do not have the Light to bear fruit and give 
birth due to the rule of the impure forces that are there. Hence, unlike our land, 
Arka cannot produce; its land has no power to receive and grow a seed, and this 
property appears in it only once in several years. 

Here The Zohar speaks of the two rulers: Afriron and Kastimon, who could 
not correct Shemaya and Arka, to make them bear fruit. Therefore, these rulers 
are not allowed to be here and seduce people in our land (Tevel), to sin, for 
when they are here, they bring harm to our land so as to make it like their 
Shemaya and Arka. 

Therefore, The Zohar says that they disappeared from the Supernal land of 
Tevel, from our land, for here they sought to bring harm by the power of the 
night. They provoke people toward sin by virtue of the night, and it is a curse 
that hangs over Arka because of their rule there. 

Our Heavens were created by the name ELEH, for our Heavens receive 
from ZA, which was corrected by ELEH’s properties, by the words: IN THE 



336 


The Zohar 


BEGINNING THE CREATOR CREATED, where MI is connected to ELEH. 
Hence, our land is corrected by the Supernal holiness and purity. Therefore, 
these two rulers are not allowed to rule here. 

160. Hence, there exists a Targum, a translation (from Hebrew to Aramaic, 
which The Zohar dubs Targum ), so the holy angels will not think that it 
is said about them, so they will not harm us. This is the secret of the word 
ELEH —as we have already stated, it is a holy word that cannot be translated 
into a Targum. 

Everything but the word ELEH has been translated into the language of 
the Targum, as it is said in item 149, that ELEH disappeared from both Ark a 
and Shemaya, for the word ELEH is untranslatable, as it constitutes the full 
connection between ELEH and Ml, which causes the descent of O hr Hochma. 
And should anyone sin and corrupt the letters ELEH, as Cain had done, they 
would fall to the impure forces, so even the holiness of the Targum (VAK of the 
pure forces) would depart from them. 



Among All the Sages of the Nations 
of the World, There Are None Like You 


161. Rabbi Elazar said, “It is written: ‘Who would not fear the King of the 
nations of the world?’ What kind of praise is this?” Rabbi Shimon replied: 
“Elazar, my son, this has been said in several places. However, one should 
not understand the verse, ‘For among all the sages of the nations of the 
world, and in all their kingdoms, there are none like You’ in its simple, literal 
interpretation. This is because it naturally gives rise to evil intentions of 
sinners—those who think that the Creator is not aware of their dark thoughts, 
doubts and intents. Therefore, their folly must be clarified. A philosopher 
of one of the nations of the world came to me and said, ‘You say that your 
Creator governs the entire Heavens, and that all the Heavenly hosts are unable 
to attain Him, nor come to know His dwelling place. However, this does not 
add to His greatness, as it is written, ‘among all the sages of the nations of 
the world, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like You.’ What kind of a 
comparison is this when He is compared to man, who is nothing?”’ 

This is similar to what is written about sinners in Psalms (Tehilim, 73:1L12): 
“And they say: ‘How does the Creator know? And is there knowledge in Him? 
Behold the wicked; they are always at peace, rich and powerful.’” This is exactly 
what the philosopher says. He was one of the greatest sages among the nations of 
the world, and he came to Rabbi Shimon to dishonor Israel’s wisdom and work 
in absolute faith for the Creator’s sake, which ought to be in great wholeness, 
perfection, purity, and integrity, for no thought can grasp Him. 

This sage was a representative of the philosophers who asserted that the 
main principle in working for the Creator is to attain Him, rather than serve 
Him in faith, for in their understanding, they attain Him. And now he has 
come to ridicule Israel’s approach. 


337 



338 


The Zohar 


Hence, he said: “The Creator is above all human wisdom, and thereby He 
rules, and He bid you to work for Him in faith and purity, and have no doubts in 
Him, for the human mind cannot grasp Him. After all, even the Heavenly hosts, 
His legions and angels are unable to attain Him, as it is written of those who say: 
‘Blessed be the Creator in His place,’ for they do not know ‘His place.’” 

However, the phrase, “as among all the sages of the world, there is none like 
the Creator” does not imply the Creator’s greatness. Indeed, if this prophetic 
expression is used in order to exalt the God of Israel and show that He is greater 
than the god attained by the sages of the nations of the world by their human 
strength and reason, then naturally, this does not add to the glory of the God of 
Israel, as He is being compared to trifle and transient forces. On the contrary, 
this statement shows great disdain for your Creator, when you compare Him to 
the sages of the nations of the world, who are mortal and restricted creatures. 
Those were the words that the scholarly sage, who represented the wisdom of 
the nations of the world, uttered before Rabbi Shimon. 

Clearly, The Zohar is referring to some overseas sage who paid a visit to Rabbi 
Shimon. Just like all the other names of places and characters mentioned in the 
Torah, the Talmud, and the Kabbalah, names of places, animals, people, and 
actions described in The Zohar speak only of the spiritual world, the Creator’s 
actions, and how one can achieve the goal of creation. In no way does any of this 
relate to events in our world! 

Therefore, the “sage of the nations of the world” symbolizes man’s own 
egoistic property to research and know everything, instead of having faith above 
reason, as the Torah demands. This human property, called a “sage of the 
nations of the world,” the egoistic reason, is in a state of constant argument 
with man’s spiritual, altruistic property, called “Israel” or the aspiration to the 
Creator. Thus, by opposing it, man builds himself and grows. 

162. Furthermore, you claim, as your Torah says, that “There had not risen 
a prophet since in Israel like Moshe.” There are none in Israel, but there is 
one among the nations of the world! So I claim the same: there is none like 
You among all the sages of the nations of the world, but among the sages of 
Israel there is one like You. However, if there is one like Him among the sages 
of Israel, then He cannot be the Supreme Ruler. Look closely into my words, 
and you shall see that I am right. 

Here the philosopher (man’s egoistic voice) spoke wisely. He understood 
that should he speak directly, he would hear precise answers to his questions. It 
is written: “Among all the sages of the nations of the world, there are none like 



Among All the Sages, There Are None Like You 


339 


You,” meaning that there is no one that can attain You. For the words, “there 
are none like You” imply that You have no equals, drat it is impossible to attain 
You, attain Your degree. 

However, since the sages of the nations of the world (human reason) take 
pride in their attainment of die Creator (that they understand His intentions 
and actions), they consider themselves similar to Him, for attainment means 
similarity of properties with die attained degree. This is why it is considered a 
lie, and that there are none like Him, for they do not attain die Creator, but 
only delude themselves by thinking that they do. 

The philosopher (within man) understood that, and hence began (leading 
man astray from the path of faith, which surpasses and defies reason) with a 
completely different question: “If it is explicitly said that no one is equal to the 
Creator among the sages of the other nations, does it not mean that there are 
those who can attain Him among the sages of Israel? Otherwise, why would it be 
necessary to specify that there are none like Him among the sages of the nations 
of the world? 

“But if this is so, and He is similar to you, then He cannot be the Supreme 
Ruler! Thus, how can you say that the God of Israel cannot be attained by 
reason and that He governs all? You speak by means of faith in His greatness, 
but indeed there are those among your sages who are like Him, i.e., those who 
attain Him.” 

163. Rabbi Shimon said to him, “You object correctly that there are those 
among the sages of Israel who are similar to the Creator, for who resurrects 
the dead back to life, if not the Creator Himself? Yet, Eliyahu and Elisha 
came and resurrected the dead back to life! Who causes rain to fall if not the 
Creator Himself? Yet, Eliyahu came and abolished rain, and then summoned 
it through his prayer! Who created the Heavens and the earth, if not the 
Creator Himself? Yet, Avraham came, and, as it is written, the Heavens and 
the earth were revived.” 

Rabbi Shimon replies that the (inner) sage speaks the truth when he 
asserts that there are those among the sages of Israel who are similar to the 
Creator. However, in no way does this revoke the simple faith in the Creator’s 
unattainability by human reason. Of course, He is the master and ruler of the 
Heavens, and He is so much higher than all of them that even the Supernal 
angels cannot attain Him and do not know His place. 

Yet, the Torah and Mitjvot (commandments) were given to us precisely for 
this purpose—so that by observing the Mitzvot (making a Zivug between the screen 



340 


The Zohar 


and die Light) and studying the Torah (receiving the Light) for the Creator’s 
sake, we, Israel (those who aspire to the Creator) would completely merge with 
Him (in our properties), so His Light would permeate us and clothe in us to 
such an extent that we would merit (begin to desire and receive the power of 
a screen) carrying out the same actions as the Creator: resurrecting the dead 
(correcting egoism), summoning rains (Ohr Hassadim), and reviving Heaven and 
earth (filling all the Partzufim in all the worlds with the Light of our actions). 

In that, we are just like Him, as it is said: “By Your deeds (by experiencing 
them on myself) I will know You.” However, we attain all this only through 
absolute and devout faith (the property of Bina), which leaves within us no 
desires whatsoever to attain Him with our reason (to verify first and act next), 
as in the path of sages of the nations of the world (our egoism). Our egoism 
consists of a Partzuf called a “sage of the nations of the world.” Its Rosh (head) 
designates knowledge and desire to attain everything, and its Guf (body) is the 
will to receive pleasure for oneself. 

The philosopher argues that if Israel can do what the Creator does, then 
Israel attains Him. This is correct, for if one is able to act like the Creator, then, 
to the extent of his actions, he attains and perceives Him. After all, it is said: “By 
Your deeds I will know You.” If one acts like the Creator, then he understands 
the Creator’s analogous actions in his own actions, and thus perceives Him. 
However, one must first advance by faith above reason, and as a result, he attains 
the Creator’s properties, thereby becoming like Him in his actions. 

164. (Rabbi Shimon continues:) “Who governs the sun, if not the Creator? 
Yet, Yehoshua came and stopped it. The Creator issues His decree, yet Moshe 
immediately issues a decree of his own, and it is carried out. The Creator wishes 
to punish, and the righteous of Israel annul His verdict. Moreover, He bid us 
to closely follow His ways and to be like Him in every way.” The philosopher 
then went and became Israel, and lived in the village of Shachalayim, and they 
called him Yosi HaKatan (Little Yosi). He studied the Torah a great deal, and 
was among the sages and the righteous of that village. 

The problem is that if a person does everything only by means of his faith, 
he denies himself the chance to attain the Creator, for attainment comes 
through applying reason. However, the moment he begins to apply his reason, he 
immediately diminishes his faith. So how can one combine faith with reason? 

It is true that those who aspire to draw nearer the Creator (those who are 
called Israel) diminish their simple, devout faith. However, they do this only 
because He bids them to do so in order to attain His actions, and thus become 
like Him, as it is said in the Torah: “Follow His way” ( Devarim , 21). Hence, 



Among All the Sages, There Are None Like You 


341 


they observe His commandments. The philosopher was so overwhelmed by this 
truth that he became “Israel” and started observing the Torah and Mitzvot. 

He was overwhelmed when he had found that Israel’s actions, their 
attainments of the spiritual worlds, did not diminish their faith above reason, for 
all of their actions and attainments were based on faith. Israel attains the Creator 
because He bids them to, not because they desire this with their egoism. 

165. And now the time has come to take a closer look at this verse. It is 
written that all the nations of the world are nothing before Him. Yet, how 
does this exalt Him? Hence, it is written: “Who sees the King of the nations 
of the world?” Yet, is the King of the nations of the world also not the King of 
Israel? The Creator wishes to elevate Israel in all places; this is why He is called 
everywhere “the King of Israel.” The other nations of the world say that they 
have another King up in the Heavens, for it seems to them that He governs 
only them, and not us. 

The nations of the world are certain that their Supernal King is not the 
King of Israel, that the King who sits in the Heavens and governs them is 
only their King, and that the King of Israel has no power over them. Thus, it 
seems to man’s egoism that it exists under some other (non-altruistic) system of 
governance, and not altruism. The egoism fails to realize that the Creator made 
it exactly the way it is so as to achieve His goal: using egoism, to bring man to 
altruism, from “for one’s own self’ to “for the Creator’s sake.” 

166. It is written: “Who would not fear the King of the nations of the world?” 
(Yirmiyahu, 10:7) That is, their Supernal King is there to threaten and 
persecute them, and do with them as He pleases. Hence, He should be feared. 
And all fear Him Above and below. For it is written that among all the sages of 
the nations of the world (the angels that rule over these nations) and in their 
Kingdoms (Above) there is none like You. There are four Kingdoms Above 
that rule over all the nations of the world according to the Creator’s will. And 
there is no one who can do even the smallest action without His personal 
instruction. The sages of the nations of the world are the forces that rule them 
from Above, and all the wisdom of the nations of the world comes from these 
rulers. “In all their Kingdoms” means that the Creator’s will rules over them. 

These lines describe how die bride, who is in a state of exile, prepares herself 
for her future, final correction. The power of the nations of the world (in every 
one of us) amounts to conquering us (the altruistic desires for the Creator) and 
placing us under their power (serving only the body). They wish to drive us away 



342 


The Zohar 


from the Creator’s rule and let other desires, called “the nations of the world” 
dominate us. Our egoistic desires, the nations of the world, do so because of 
their power (tempting us with various pleasures) and wisdom (appealing to our 
common sense). 

Their actions over us (spiritual aspirations) stem from the system of the 
impure forces and their impure (egoistic) angels (our inner egoistic forces), 
which give power and reason to the nations of the world. With the help of 
their wisdom, they (our egoistic desires) lead us (the sons of Israel, those who 
aspire only to the Creator) to all sorts of doubts and desires to understand 
the Creator, His ways and thoughts, without any fear or reverence before His 
greatness and supremacy. 

Because of these doubts, we draw far from the Creator and His Supernal 
Light, which, as a result, passes on to them (our egoistic desires), as it is 
written, “Tzur (the capital of the impure forces) was built only on the ruins of 
Jerusalem (the capital of the pure forces).” Thus, they acquire the strength to 
persecute and humiliate Israel, and force them to submit to their will (suppress 
the only true path to the spiritual—faith above and in defiance of reason—with 
their persuasions and proof of their “real” rightfulness). And as it was already 
explained in the “Introduction to the Book of Zohar” (items 69-71), our inner 
spiritual enslavement leads to our external, corporeal enslavement, persecution, 
and humiliation by the nations of the world. 

This is the secret of the four Kingdoms that rule over us in our four (spiritual 
and therefore physical) exiles, which correspond to Sefirot H-B-ZA-M, symbolized 
by Nebuchadnezzar, as it is written: “Here is that idol, its head made of pure 
gold, its breast and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass, its shins of 
iron, and its feet part iron and part clay” (Daniel, 2:32-33). 

When this idol governs us, the nations of the world mock us, claiming 
that they have a King of their own. However, such was the Creator’s plan, as 
it is said: “The Creator hath so made it, that men should fear Him” (Kohelet, 
3:14), for the sensation of the Creator, called Shechina, is also referred to as fear 
before Him. However, since we do not yet feel the greatness and supremacy of 
the Creator, we do not merit fearing Him, and live in fear of the King of the 
nations of the world. 

This points to the fact that we have no other way of completely and eternally 
merging with the Creator other than by means of tremendous fear before His 
greatness, by assuming His Torah and His desires (Mitzvot) in devout and 
complete faith, without any doubts in His properties. 



Among All the Sages, There Are None Like You 


343 


Only then will we merge with Him in absolute, eternal union, and the 
Creator will impart us with all the goodness for which He had created us. He 
conceived this in the beginning of creation, and it became the purpose behind 
the whole of creation. This state is considered the complete and final deliverance 
and correction. 

However, before the attainment of such an exalted spiritual state, this is how 
the prophet describes those who aspire to the Creator: “You have sown much, 
and brought in little; you eat but you have not enough; you drink but your thirst 
is not quenched” ( Haggai , 1:6), for in all of our actions (of those who aspire to 
the spiritual) the impure force (egoism) constantly takes all the Light for itself. 
This occurs as a result of our doubts with regard to faith in the Creator, which 
the impure force itself cultivates within us. 

However, the purpose of these punishments is not to cause us grief. Everything 
happens according to the Creator’s plan and serves only to promote us toward 
correction. Therefore, as long as man can listen only to egoistic arguments, the 
Creator develops us gradually, using these forces. With their help, we gradually 
become fit to feel fear of the Creator, through the many trials and sufferings our 
exile from the spiritual brings us. 

But in the end, we merit the reception of complete and devoted faith and fear 
before His greatness. It is written of this state: “He remembered His mercy and His 
allegiance toward the house of Israel, and all the worthless creatures of the earth 
witnessed the help and deliverance at the Creator’s hands” (Tehilim, 98:3). 

This is because at the end of days, the Creator will remember us in His 
mercy, and will give us the strength to receive complete and devout faith in Him. 
Thus, Jerusalem (the capital of altruism) will be rebuilt on the ruins of Tzur 
(the capital of egoism), for all the Light, which Malchut of the impure force was 
robbing of us throughout our exile from the spiritual, will return to us when we 
acquire complete and devout faith, and will shine within us with all its might. 

All the worthless creatures of the earth (manifestations of egoism) will then 
see with their own eyes how our Creator saves (corrects) them. For all the nations 
of the world (within us) will see that they have always possessed this Light until 
the very last moment before their correction so as to give it back to us at the 
appropriate time. And all shall see that “one man’s rule over another is to the 
detriment of the ruler!” (Kohelet, 8:9). 

The burden of our slavery and the impure force’s rule over us (over holiness) 
harms only the impure force, for it thereby compels us to attain complete and 
devoted faith in the Creator even faster! And the prophet speaks of this time, 



344 


The Zohar 


“Who would not fear the King of the nations of the world?” for it has now been 
revealed that He is the King of the nations of the world, who persecutes and 
dominates those nations. It previously seemed to them (our egoistic intentions) 
that they persecuted us (our altruistic intentions), but now the opposite has 
been revealed to them—that they were merely blind enactors of the Creator’s 
will, our servants and our slaves, whose purpose is to bring us to perfection. 

It seemed to us that they were beating us. Now it turns out that they were beat¬ 
ing themselves, for thanks to these blows (suffering from unrealized egoistic desires 
and constant frustration), they have accelerated our deliverance and attainment of 
perfection (our realization of the need to choose the path of faith above reason). 
Thus, they have also accelerated their own demise (their own correction). 

And wherever it seemed to us (our reason) that they rebelled against the 
Creator (argued that the Creator is not the source of all reality) and acted 
(supposedly) however they pleased so as to humiliate us and satiate their base 
egoistic desires, and it appeared that there was no (Supernal) judge and no law 
(the advancement of creation toward its goal), it has now been revealed that they 
have always been fulfilling the Creator’s will, to bring us (all our desires, them 
included) to perfection. 

The same applies to every person in the world—whether he wants to or not, 
at all times and in every way, he fulfills only the Creator’s will. Why then is he 
not called the Creator’s servant? Because he acts unconsciously, not of his own 
will. To compel man to fulfill His will, the Creator gives him some alien desire 
to enjoy, which forces him to carry out an action, but he does so as a slave of his 
desire, and not as someone who fulfills the Creator’s will. 

For example, the Creator may give man an alien desire to make money, 
thereby compelling him to open a restaurant so as to carry out altruistic actions 
as a slave of his egoistic desire. 

In other words, to compel us to do what is necessary, the Creator created 
within us an egoistic desire to receive pleasure, thus obliging us to do His will 
by enabling us to find pleasure in the actions and objects on which He wants 
us to work. This is why we live in constant chase of pleasures, whereas in truth 
we are constantly and unconsciously fulfilling the Creator’s will. This resembles 
a situation in which children are given many toys to play with, but as they play, 
they also carry out work. 

The entire world is doing the Creator’s will, but our goal, the purpose of 
our development is to do it consciously. We must attain and realize His will; we 
must ascend so high that we will want to do it wholeheartedly and on our own, 



Among All the Sages, There Are None Like You 


345 


rather than as we do it now—unconsciously and coercively. We must achieve a 
state when our desires fully coincide with those of the Creator, which designates 
complete and conscious union with Him. 

Thus, it becomes clear that the King of the nations of the world is the same 
Creator that rules over them and compels them to fulfill all His desires, as a 
King does with his slaves. And now fear before the Creator is revealed to all 
the nations of the world. The phrase, “all the nations of the world” alludes to 
the angels that rule over those nations, such as Afriron, Kastimon, Aza, Azael 
and others, from whom the sages of the nations of the world (our egoism and 
reason) receive their wisdom, and with whose help they oppress Israel (our 
altruistic desires). 

IN THEIR KINGDOMS refers to the four existing Kingdoms, which 
govern the seventy nations of the world (ZON = seven Sefirot, each of which 
containing ten sub-Se/irot: in all seventy Sefirot) and over us (altruistic aspirations) 
in our four exiles, which correspond to the impure Sefirot H-B-ZA-M (described 
as Nebuchadnezzar). As the prophet writes: “Here is that idol, its head made 
of pure gold (the first Kingdom), its breast and its arms of silver (the second 
Kingdom), its belly and its thighs of brass (the third Kingdom), its shins of iron, 
its feet part iron and part clay (the fourth Kingdom)” ( Daniel , 2:32-33). 

There is not one among them who can make even the smallest action of 
their own, but only what You bid them. However, this will only be revealed at 
the end of correction, and all will know that all of our misfortunes and suffering 
that had the power to separate us from the Creator were but loyal executors of 
the Creator’s aspiration to draw us closer to Him. Moreover, these cruel forces 
did nothing else but obey His orders. 

And the sole purpose of all that transpired was to bring us to a state where 
we can receive all the perfection and infinite goodness that He intended to 
bestow upon us from the very beginning in His plan of creation. The Creator 
must lead us to complete and devout faith, the result of which will be, as the 
prophet said: “Then, at once, the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the 
gold all crumbled to pieces and became like the chaff on summer threshing- 
floors; and the wind carried them away, and no trace was left of them; and the 
stone that smote their image became a great mountain, and filled the whole 
earth” ( Daniel , 2:35). 

Absolute faith is called “unbreakable (non-crumbling) stone.” After one 
merits absolute faith, the impure force (his inner egoistic desires and thoughts) 
disappears as though it had never existed. And all the worthless creatures 




346 


The Zohar 


(reason, logic, philosophy, and common sense), which inhabit the earth, witness 
deliverance at the hands of the Creator, as the prophet said: “They shall not 
do evil nor destroy in all My holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters fill the sea” (Yeshayahu, 11:9). 

167. Yet, among all the sages of the nations of the world and in all their 
kingdoms, I have found in the ancient books that even though the Heavenly 
hosts and legions fully obeyed their given orders and each would receive precise 
instructions to be carried out, but who among them can do it if not You, who 
will do it better than You? For You excel over them all in both properties and 
deeds. Hence, it is written: “There is none like You.” 

The Creator Himself carries out all the creatures’ actions with His Light, 
and leads them to His goal. Man’s sole task is the realization of all creation and 
governance, to wholeheartedly agree with all of the Creator’s actions, and take 
an active part in the process of spiritual creation. 

168. Rabbi Shimon said to his friends: “This wedding must be a wedding for 
all of you, and each of you should bring a gift (his own part in the common 
M alchut) to the Bride.” He said to Rabbi Elazar, his son: “Present the Bride 
with a gift, for on the following day Zeir A npin will look as he enters the 
wedding canopy at the sound of these songs and praises of the sons of the 
wedding canopy, who stand before the Creator.” 




Who Is This? 


169. Rabbi Elazar opened and said, “Who is this coming up from the 
wasteland?” (Shir HaShirim, 3:6). MI ZOT—who is this—is the common 
ground of the two questions, the two worlds, Bina and M alchut, which are 
bound together. COMING UP—coming up to become the “Holy of Holies.” 
For MI is Bina , called the Holy of Holies. And she joins with ZOT (M alchut), 
so that Malchut could come up FROM THE WASTEFAND, for she inherits 
THIS from the wasteland, to become a bride and enter the bridal canopy. 

The Zohar explains the following passage: “Who is this coming up from the 
wasteland, leaning upon her beloved!?” (Shir HaShirim, 8:5). It describes a state 
at the end of correction, when the bride enters the wedding canopy. MI ZOT: 
MI is Bina and ZOT is Malchut. At the end of correction, Bina and Malchut 
unite, and both are called “holy.” But until the end of correction only Bina is 
called holy, while Malchut ascends to Bina and receives holiness from her. 

Nevertheless, at the end of correction, Malchut becomes like Bina, and they 
both become holy. Malchut completely unites with Bina through equivalence 
of form, and fully merges with the source of life, for a screen (the restriction 
imposed on reception of Light within Malchut) creates the Returning Light that 
combines all Sefirot into one. 

The Creator’s Ohr Hochma can be received precisely in this Returning Light. 
As a result, Malchut ends with the letter Yod and becomes forever similar to Bina. 
Hence, it is written that Malchut and Bina unite by equalizing their desires to 
form a single whole. 

Similarly, the Light of Malchut will be forever connected to the Light of Bina, 
for Malchut herself ascends to the level of the “Holy of Holies,” thus becoming 
exactly like Bina. SHE COMES UP just like a sacrifice, which is the “Holy of 
Holies,” for MI (AVI, Bina or the “Holy of Holies”) joins ZOT (Malchut), so 


347 



348 


The Zohar 


Malchut would ascend and become the “Holy of Holies.” Sacrifice is the part of 
Malchut (man’s animal egoism) that ascends with its properties to Bina. 

And when MI (Bina) joins ZOT (Malchut), and ZOT becomes the “Holy of 
Holies,” there is no longer a diminution of Malchut’s state, for this diminution 
occurred only because of the deterioration of Malchut’s properties, when new 
egoistic desires emerge within her. 

Now that Malchut has become as holy (altruistic) in her properties as Bina, 
death disappears, and the fall of Malchut into her egoistic desires is impossible, 
for she has been fully corrected and has attained the properties of Bina, which are 
referred to as holy. Through Malchut’s acquisition of these properties, the Upper 
Light (life) enters her. Malchut emerges from the wasteland (the sensation of 
life’s absence for want of altruistic properties) and enters her wedding canopy. 

This occurs thanks to man’s efforts, called “those who keep the Torah” 
(item 124). These efforts are the foremost part of creation, for they create the 
Torah and bring Malchut to the great Z ivug at the end of her correction, to her 
complete fulfillment with the Light. This great Z ivug on the entire corrected 
Malchut (including Malchut de Malchut) can be achieved by precisely this sensation 
(by man) of the spiritual wasteland. 

170. She comes up from the wasteland of the soft utterance of lips, as it is 
written, “And your mouth is comely” (Shir HaShirim, 4:3). This is because 
the Hebrew word Midbar (desert/wasteland) is derived from Dibur (speech). 
It is written of the mighty forces, that these mighty forces strike Egypt with all 
the plagues of the wasteland, for all that the Creator did to them was not in 
the wasteland, but in settlements. And the phrase “in the wasteland” means 
“by the power of speech, of spoken word.” This comes up from articulation, 
from the mouth (Malchut) as she ascends and comes under the wings of Ima 
(mother, Bina). Then, through speech, she descends upon the entire holy 
nation (the difference between speech and articulation is that articulation is 
an action that forms speech). 

Before the end of correction, when Malchut is still called the “Tree of Good 
and Evil,” all corrections occur through MAN (prayers or requests), through 
which the righteous (those who wish to become similar to the Creator in their 
properties) elevate Malchut to Bina. Consequently, Malchut receives Bina’ s 
properties for as long as Malchut remains there, for spiritual ascent signifies an 
attainment of properties. Malchut becomes as holy (altruistic) as Bina. 

MAN is a silent prayer in the heart of man, for Malchut signifies “speech.” 
Yet, until the end of correction, good words cannot exist without bad ones. That 



Who Is This? 


349 


is, this will not happen until both voice and speech come from Bina herself, when 
Malchut becomes like Bina, which designates the unity of voice and speech—the 
Z ivug of ZON in their corrected state of Gadlut. 

ZA receives the voice from Ima and passes it in his speech to Malchut. Hence, 
this speech is completely good, devoid of any evil. Thus, Malchut receives from 
Bina the Light of holiness, Hassadim. Unless it is corrected by the completely 
good, altruistic voice of Bina, Malchut’s voice will always consist of both good 
and evil. This is why impure, egoistic forces cling to her, and Malchut cannot 
receive anything from holiness (Bina). 

Hence, MAN that the righteous raise in their prayers is like a soft murmur 
of lips, a voiceless speech, as the prophet says: “Only the lips move, but the 
voice cannot be heard” (Shmuel I, 1:13). This is because there is no connection 
between MAN and the impure force, and Malchut can be elevated to Bina so she 
can receive her voice from Bina. 

As a result, a holy edifice of Malchut is erected, and she receives the 
Light from a Z ivug between voice and speech, and the holiness of her speech 
descends upon the heads of the righteous that raised MAN and thereby 
revived Malchut. 

This is why it is written that SHE COMES UP FROM THE WASTELAND, 
for the bride ( Malchut) is now invited to a great Z ivug under the wedding canopy. 
This occurs thanks to the raising of MAN by the righteous, who thereby united 
Bina (voice, Ima) with Malchut (speech). As a result, Malchut’s speech became as 
beautiful as that of Bina. 

All of these individual Z ivugim made by the various righteous (each of whom 
constitutes a small part of the common Malchut) during the 6,000 years, now 
connect all of Malchut’s parts (souls of the righteous) together in one great Z ivug, 
as the bride ( Malchut) enters her wedding canopy. 

In other words, it is precisely this soft prayer, the raising of MAN during the 
6,000 years by a voiceless speech (seeing as good is still mixed with evil in the 
voice of Malchut ), that creates the conditions for the great Z ivug of Malchut with 
ZA, of man with the Creator. 

And since Malchut received the voice of Bina (from Imu-Mother) thanks 
to the help of the righteous (all the good deeds performed by the righteous 
during the 6,000 years), everything is now combined into the great Supernal 
Z ivug under the wedding canopy. This is because Malchut becomes completely 
good without a hint of evil—the “Holy of Holies,” just like Ima. 



350 


The Zohar 


Silent speech is defined as the movement of lips without the participation of 
the palate, larynx, tongue, and teeth. This is how MAN is raised when Malchut 
ascends between the wings of Bina, i.e., receives the voice of the wings of Ima 
in her speech. Afterwards, having acquired the speech, she descends upon the 
heads of the holy nation. For after the reception of voice through Ima’s property 
of mercy, Malchut becomes as holy as Bina herself, and her holiness descends 
upon those who corrected her. Consequently, they are called the “holy nation,” 
for now the speech of Malchut is as holy as that of Ima-Bina. 

There is “voice” and there is “speech.” “Voice” is the inner part, whereas 
“speech” is its outward appearance. This appearance is based on exhaling (the 
silent letter Hey). ZA is called “voice,” and Malchut is called “speech.” Letters 
are sung according to the note signs ( Taamim ), followed by the letters with their 
punctuation marks. 

The level of Ohr Haya (called Kol— voice) emerges on the screen in the Peh of 
the third degree of thickness, known as “teeth.” From this Light ZA receives Ohr 
Hochma, and his voice is then heard outside (begets the souls of the lower ones). 

Yet, the voice of ZA is not heard below the level of Neshama, for his screen is 
not strong enough to receive Ohr Hochma. The level of Ohr Yechida in ZA, called 
Dibur (speech), emerges on the screen in the Peh of the fourth degree of thickness. 
This screen is the most powerful, as it reveals all of the Light, and is called “lips.” 

The Light of NRNHY reveals the inner, Supernal and concealed wisdom, 
Hochma, the concealed thought, the inner Light of Bina, which cannot shine 
to the lower ones, that is, in ZA, because ZON cannot receive from Peh de AA. 
Nevertheless, the two levels of the Light— Haya and Yechida—that descend from 
AA are converted into voice and speech with Bina’s help, even though it is the 
Light of thought, wisdom and reason. 

Voice is formed in ZA, and speech in Malchut. If a righteous one raises his 
prayers (MAN) to Malchut, thereby causing ZON to ascend to AVI, who are in 
constant union, to provide Light for the lower ones, ZON receive this Light 
from AVI, which is called “voice and speech.” The property of the righteous is to 
create the pure and destroy the impure with their voice. In the beginning, there 
was only one language (one speech) in the world, Lashon HaKodesh— the holy 
language. In Hebrew (as in English) the same word ( Lashon) means “tongue” 
(both as a body part and as a means of communication). 

171. He asks: “How does Malchut ascend in speech?” And he replies: “When 
man first awakens in the morning and opens his eyes, he must bless his 
Creator and Master. How is he to bless Him? The way it was done by the first 



Who Is This? 


351 


Hassidim: they would prepare a vessel of water beside them, so that when they 
woke at night, they would wash their hands at once, and, having blessed the 
Torah, would rise to study it. When the rooster crowed, precisely heralding 
midnight, the Creator was with the righteous in the Garden of Eden. And it 
is forbidden to perform a blessing in the morning with unclean hands.” 

He asks: since it is written that the beginning of Malchut’s correction must 
be expressed in a quiet murmur of lips, how can he who wakes up (spiritually) 
immediately pronounce a blessing at the top of his voice? After all, the blessing 
must also be uttered in whisper so as to first receive a voice from Ima, and with 
this voice (by the force of lma-Bina) elevate Malchut to Bina, and impart onto her 
altruistic properties. 

The Zohar replies: The first Hassidim have corrected this. As man falls asleep 
(falls to the level of the Light in his Partzuf called “sleep”), his holy soul (the 
Light that was in his spiritual Partzuf) ascends, and only the impure spirit of the 
primordial serpent (egoistic properties) remains in him, for sleep constitutes the 
60 th part of death (Talmud, Berachot, 57:2). 

Since death is an impure property of the primordial serpent, the impure 
spirit (egoistic desires) does not leave man completely as he wakes up (receives 
a new Light from Above), but remains on man’s fingertips (not all of man’s 
desires change under the influence of the Light received from Above, called 
“the Light of morning” or “the Light of awakening”). 

And the greater holiness and Light that was present in man before he fell 
asleep (before he fell into a diminished spiritual state, called “sleep”), the more 
the impure (egoistic) force clings to these desires when the altruistic intentions 
exit them during sleep. 

Fingertips constitute the purest place (desires) of the entire body (all desires), 
man’s most spiritual desires, for they can be filled with Ohr Hochma (O hr Hochma 
enters these desires during a Z ivug, with the help of a screen). Therefore, even 
after awakening (at the beginning of the spiritual ascent), the impure (egoistic) 
force does not leave this place, wishing to receive at least some of that great 
Light, which can fill these most altruistic human desires. 

Hence, hands must be washed in order to remove the residual egoistic 
desires. For this to happen, two vessels need to be prepared: the Upper One 
(cup) and the lower one that will accept the removed impurity. 

The Upper Vessel designates Bina, whose Light drives the impure force away. 
Hence, washing the fingertips with water (the forces or desires of Bina ) expels 
the impure force (man’s egoistic desires) from them. Thus, Malchut rids herself 



352 


The Zohar 


of her evil (egoism) and becomes holy and good. Afterwards, one can study the 
Torah and bless the Creator for it, for washing hands is similar to raising MAN 
in a whispered prayer to the wings of Ima. 

And when the rooster crows (this is a special spiritual sign of the angel 
Gavriel), it is precisely midnight, as it is written: “The greater star to rule the day 
and the lesser star to rule the night” (Bereshee t, 1:16). For the lesser star, the holy 
Shechina-Malchut grew smaller, clothed in impure forces and “her feet descend 
to death” (M ishley, 5:5). 

This is so because during the 6,000 years, up to her final correction, 
Malchut constitutes the Tree (foundations) of Good and Evil: if one is worthy, 
she becomes good for him and purifies him, if not—she turns evil. Accordingly, 
the rule of night is also divided into two parts: the first refers to a state called 
“unworthy—evil,” and the second refers to a state called “worthy—good.” 

The first correction of Malchut’s good part is made exactly at midnight (in a 
state so called “midnight”), for it is then that Malchut receives the voice of Bina. 
Put differently, Malchut ascends to Malchut de Ima-Bina and corrects herself 
within it. As a result, the strictness and judgment in Malchut become holy and 
good, completely devoid of evil. This means that strictness and judgment fall 
onto the impure forces, but for Israel, they turn into mercy. 

Yitzchak signifies restriction, the property of Malchut within Bina. The 
Hebrew word for a “rooster” is Tarnegol, and also Gever (man) and designates 
the angel Gavriel, who attends to Malchut, the lesser star. The strictness of Bina 
pierces the wings of the rooster (Gavriel), and through it Malchut receives the 
voice of Bina. 

And when Gavriel passes the voice of Bina to Malchut, his call reaches all 
the roosters of this world, the property of judgment in the spiritual void. Such 
a state is called “this world” or Malchut de Malchut. Everyone speaks only in this 
voice, which was corrected by Bina’s property of mercy. 

Therefore, the voice of Malchut (her judgment) no longer dominates the 
second half of the night, and the voice of Bina claims this place. This is what the 
“rooster of this world” heralds—the property of judgment in Malchut de Malchut. 

Hence, a rooster’s crow (change of properties) is heard precisely at midnight 
(when states change), for this crow means that Malchut has already been corrected 
by the voice of Bina, and that this voice is already within Malchut. This is defined 
as the moment of midnight, which marks the beginning of the second half- 
absolute goodness, devoid of evil. 



Who Is This? 


353 


After Malchut receives the voice of Bina, the righteous (man’s properties in 
the worlds of BYA) raise MAN with the help of their study of Torah after (in the 
state of) midnight. They keep raising MAN to the “cheerful strictness” in Ima, of 
which it is written: “She rises also while it is yet night” (M ishley, 31:15), for it is 
precisely at night that the Supernal Malchut reveals herself in all her splendor. 

And the actual revelation of Malchut takes place in the Garden of Eden, i.e., 
she is meant for those righteous who have corrected her with their work and 
studies (in the state) after midnight. The Creator rejoices with them (merriment 
signifies fulfillment with Ohr Hochma ) in the Garden of Eden, for the corrected 
Malchut is called “the Holy Shechina” or “the Garden of Eden,” for she receives 
Hochma and rejoices with the righteous that constitute MAN within her. 

And the phrase that describes how impurity (egoistic desires) is washed away 
(corrected to altruistic properties) from man’s fingers (his most exalted desires) 
is true not only with regard to nighttime. Man ascends from the lower degree 
of “sleep” onto a higher degree of “awakening,” the difference between the two 
states being that previously, he was receiving only the vital Ohr Hassadim, called 
“sleep,” while “awakening” signifies reception of Ohr Hochma. This is because 
the impure force constantly clings to man’s fingertips (precisely for man to 
correct it and thus attain greater spiritual heights), and he is obliged to wash his 
hands (make his desires and intentions “for the Creator’s sake”) before uttering 
a blessing (appealing to the Creator for reception). 

172. For when man is asleep, his soul (spirit) leaves him. And as soon as his soul 
departs from him, the impure spirit replaces it at once, and it fills his hands 
and defiles them, and it is forbidden to utter a blessing without washing one’s 
hands. And should you object that when man is awake and his soul does not 
leave him, the impure force does not descend upon him, then, if he enters a 
washroom, he is forbidden from reading even a single word of the Torah until 
he washes his hands. And if you say that it is because his hands are soiled, this 
is not true, for how are they soiled? 

173. But woe unto those who do not beware and do not guard the Creator’s 
honor and do not know the foundation of this world. There is a certain spirit 
that dwells in every cesspool of the world, a spirit that relishes depravity and 
excrement, and it immediately settles on the fingers of man’s hands. 

Just like Rabbi Y. Ashlag, I refrain from commenting on items 172 and 173 
of The Zohar, and he who merits it—will understand this text himself. 




He Who Rejoices on Holidays 


174. Rabbi Shimon opened and said: “He who rejoices on holidays and does 
not give a part to the Creator, the evil eye hates and slanders him, removes 
him from this world, and brings him many miseries.” 

We have already said (item 68) that the impure forces (egoistic spiritual 
forces within man that know of and hence desire the pleasures hidden in the 
Creator’s Light) consist of male and female parts. The male part brings less harm 
than the female. It leads man to transgressions such as lying in the name of the 
Creator, as though it inspires man to observe the Mitzvot, but not in complete 
purity (with the sole purpose of pleasing the Creator). Instead, it causes man 
to also add a touch of personal benefit and selfish enjoyment, as it is written: 
“Eat not the bread of an ill-wilier, nor desire his treats; for as one reckons within 
himself, such is he: ‘Eat and drink,’ he shall say to you; but his heart is not with 
you” ( Mishley , 23:6-7). 

Since the male impure force has absolutely no intentions to bestow, the 
commandment remains devoid of fear and love (without a heart). Yet, since the 
male impure force has already caught man in its net, it gains power to make a 
Zivug with its female half (the impure Nukva), which is a bitter and evil impure 
force that lies in the name of the Creator, and, upon seducing man, captures 
his entire soul. 

Hence, The Zohar says that the evil eye hates and slanders man, and removes 
him from this world by provoking him to fail to observe the commandment of 
rejoicing on a holiday (the reception of O hr Hochma, joy on a higher degree)—so 
that this joy would not be for the sake of the Creator. It is as though he eats 
alone and does not share his food with the needy, which leads to the male 
impure force making a Zivug with Nukva and capturing man’s soul. 


355 



356 


The Zohar 


175. The Creator’s role is to cheer the poor, according to His ability. For the 
Creator appears on the holidays so as to look at His broken Kelim. He conies 
to them, and He sees that there is nothing to rejoice in, and He weeps for 
them, and ascends Above to destroy the world. 

To understand this passage and the angels’ objections, one must first 
understand the words of the sages (Midrash Raba, 86): “When creating the world, 
the Creator asked the angels: ‘Shall we create man in our image (Tzelem) and 
likeness?’ And the four angels (forces, properties) of creation gave their answers: 

Mercy said, LET US CREATE, for he creates Hassadim, mercy. Truth 
said, LET US NOT CREATE, for he is all falsehood. Justice said, LET US 
CREATE, for he dispenses justice. Peace said, LET US NOT CREATE, for he 
is all enmity.” 

What did the Creator do? He took truth and concealed it in the ground, as 
it is written: “cast down truth to the ground” (Daniel, 8:12). Our entire purpose 
in the study of the Torah and Mitzvot lies in that, thanks to them, as the Talmud 
says (Psachim, 50, 2): “From Lo Lishma (intentions for oneself) man comes to 
Lishma (intentions for the Creator’s sake).” 

And since man is born with such insignificant desires and powers, he is 
unable to immediately engage in the Creator’s Mitzvot for the sake of pleasing 
the Giver of these Mitzvot, for as it is said: “Man is born akin to a wild ass” ( lyov , 
11:12). Due to his egoistic nature, he is unable to make any inner movement or 
action if it is not for his own benefit. 

Therefore, the Creator allows man to begin observing the Mitzvot solely for 
his own sake, seeking personal benefit. Yet, in spite of this, his actions attract 
spiritual Light to him. And then, with the help of the received Light, he comes 
to observe the Mitzvot for the Creator’s sake, in order to please Him. 

This is exactly what Truth presented when it objected to man’s creation 
and said that he is all falsehood. After all, how can man be created to study the 
Torah and observe Mitzvot in a state of absolute falsehood, i.e., “for oneself?” 

However, Mercy said, “Let us create,” for man performs merciful deeds. 
Although the Mitzvot of mercy, which man observes (even if mechanically) initially 
“for his own sake,” are mere external actions without the intention of bestowal, 
with their help he gradually corrects his intentions until he becomes capable of 
observing all the Mitzvot “for the Creator’s sake.” Hence, there exists an absolute 
certainty and guarantee that through his efforts, man will achieve the goal- 
altruistic actions “for the Creator’s sake.” And that it is okay to create man. 



He Who Rejoices on Holidays 


357 


Peace also asserted that man is all “enmity;” hence, he can observe the Mitzvot 
“for the Creator’s sake” only if it also brings him personal benefit. However, due 
to such mixed intentions and actions, man exists in constant conflict with the 
Creator, for it seems to him that he is great and righteous, and he utterly fails to 
see his shortcomings. In other words, he is completely unaware that all his work 
in the Torah and Mitzvot is exclusively for his own benefit. 

And because he feels this way, he fills up with anger and resentment towards 
the Creator: why does the Creator not treat him as it befits one so perfectly 
righteous? It follows that he alternates between states of peace and conflict with 
the Creator. That is why Peace objected to the creation of man. 

However, Justice said that man should be created, for he dispenses justice. 
By observing the Mitzva (singular for Mitzvot) of giving charity to the poor, even 
with the intention “for oneself,” he gradually acquires the property of “bestowal,” 
learns to act “for the Creator’s sake,” and merits eternal peace with Him. 

After the Creator heard these opinions, He agreed with the angels of 
Mercy and Justice, and cast down Truth to the “ground.” By this, He allowed 
man to begin observing the Mitzvot with the intention “for oneself,” despite 
its falsehood. 

It follows that the Creator cast Truth down to the ground because He had 
accepted the claims of Mercy and Justice, that thanks to the Mitzva of giving 
charity to the poor, man will ultimately come to Truth, i.e., work for the Creator’s 
sake, and Truth will rise from the ground. 

The only creation created by the Creator is Malchut de Malchut, egoism, 
and it can only be corrected by “instilling” the Creator’s properties of Bina 
or mercy into it. Yet, if these properties are opposite, how can such a thing be 
accomplished? After all, in the spiritual world, distance is proportionate to the 
difference in properties. So how can Malchut be united with Bina ? 

To this end, the Kli was broken: the spiritual, altruistic desire lost its screen 
and became egoistic. Yet, it retained sparks of the Light, and these sparks exist 
within egoistic desires. This is why egoistic desires have power over us. 

These sparks of the Upper Light are the source of various pleasures and love, 
for Light is pleasure. And since these particles of Light are clothed in impure 
garments and exist under the rule of the impure forces, man starts perceiving 
these feelings of love and delight as being inherent in the impure forces, as 
though these egoistic garments contain pleasures, and such is their property. 
And he associates the properties of love and pleasure with the impure forces, 



358 


The Zohar 


failing to understand that the impure forces draw him solely with the spiritual 
spark that has fallen into them. 

However, as the impure force is very appealing, it lures man into all kinds 
of transgressions, such as theft, robbery, and murder. At the same time, it gives 
us the desire to observe the Torah and M itzvot for our own sake. Even if we start 
observing them not “for the Creator’s sake,” but “for ourselves,” (for our own 
benefit, to fulfill our base aspirations, according to the desires of the broken, 
egoistic Kelim-vessels), we gradually come to the intention “for the Creator’s 
sake,” and merit the goal of creation—to receive all the pleasure that was prepared 
for us back in the Thought of Creation—“to delight man.” Thus, the impure 
forces destroy themselves, but that is exactly the purpose for which the Creator 
conceived and created them. 

The Zohar says that the Creator appears on these holidays to look at all the 
broken Kelim. On holidays, when man observes the Mitzva of rejoicing because 
of the great Light that he receives from the Creator, the Creator appears to look 
at His broken vessels, by which man is given an opportunity to observe the 
Mitzvot not “for the Creator’s sake.” The Creator comes and looks at how well 
these broken vessels have fulfilled their mission to bring man to observance of 
the Mitzvot with the intention “for the Creator’s sake.” 

However, the Creator comes to them and sees that there is nothing to rejoice 
in. He weeps over them, for He sees that nothing spiritual (altruistic) was created 
from the broken vessels, that man has yet to correct even a single broken vessel 
(egoistic desire). In other words, there’s not one vessel that was intentionally 
broken by the Creator that has brought man to the intention “for the Creator’s 
sake,” and he rejoices on holidays solely for his own pleasure. 

So the Creator weeps and regrets breaking the vessels, for He broke them 
and cast Truth to the ground only for man’s sake, to give him an opportunity to 
start working in falsehood (in the intention “for oneself’) and gradually come 
to Truth, to the intention “for the Creator’s sake.” Yet, when He sees that man 
has not changed at all in his aspirations for selfish pleasure, it is as though the 
vessels were broken in vain, and so He weeps for them. 

And He rises Above, to destroy the world—meaning, He ascends so as to stop 
the Light’s descent and thereby destroy the world. The world and creatures can 
exist only if they receive the Creator’s Light (even if unconsciously). However, 
if man’s state and selfish actions cannot lead him to the intention “for the 
Creator’s sake,” the Light itself becomes detrimental to him, for in pursuit of this 
Light, man sinks ever deeper into egoistic desires (impure forces) and growing 



He Who Rejoices on Holidays 


359 


dependency on egoism. Therefore, it is more desirable and beneficial for man 
to stop feeling pleasure in his impure desires, so that it would not destroy him 
completely and prevent him from sinking into such powerful egoistic desires 
that, having become a slave to their pleasures, he would never be able escape 
them and attain the spiritual. 

176. The members of the assembly then appear before the Creator and say: 
“Master of the world, You are called merciful and forgiving, send Your mercy 
upon Your sons.” He answers them: “Have I not done so, when I created the 
world based on mercy? As it is written, ‘The world is built by mercy’ and the 
world is established upon it. However, if they do not show mercy to the poor, 
the world will be destroyed.” The Heavenly angels then say to Him: “Master 
of the world, here is a man who had eaten and drunk to his heart’s content, 
and could have been merciful to the poor, but did not do anything.” The 
prosecutor appears, receives permission, and persecutes that man. 

The exalted souls, called “the members (or the sons) of the assembly” begin 
praying for the lower ones, so the Creator would have mercy on His sons and 
not discontinue the flow of Light descending onto them. They do everything 
within their power to justify man’s state of being, and say that as long as he 
observes his Mitzvot in faith, he is called “the Creator’s son,” and hence deserves 
the Creator’s mercy, as a son deserves the mercy of his father. 

The Creator replies to them that He created the world by the property of 
mercy, and the world stands on this property alone. In other words, man will 
not be corrected by the Creator’s Light as long as he disdains the poor, for the 
world’s creation was the result of the Creator’s agreement with the angel of 
Mercy, which states that due to man’s merciful deeds, the world will be able to 
exist and will gradually come to the intention “for the Creator’s sake.” But now, 
since people are not showing mercy, there will be no correction. 

Then the Supernal angels said, “Master of the universe, here is a man who 
had eaten and drunk, and had his fill, and could have been merciful to the poor, 
but did not give them anything.” In this case, the angels begin to accuse man, 
instead of defending him, even the angels of Mercy and Justice. And all those 
who did not wish to create an egoistic man with desires “for oneself,” but agreed 
to it only because they assumed that by deeds of mercy and justice he would 
escape his egoism “for one’s own sake” and achieve the altruistic property “for 
the Creator’s sake.” Now, they, too, turn against man. 

And if man is unable to acquire the intention “for the Creator’s sake,” the 
angels repent and regret at having agreed to his creation, and they now accuse 



360 


The Zohar 


him before the Creator. And after it becomes clear that man will not achieve the 
altruistic property “for the Creator’s sake” by observing the Mitzvot, he is passed 
into the hands of the prosecutor. 

177. There are none greater in our world than Avraham, who acted with mercy 
toward all creatures. It is written of the day that he prepared a feast: “The child 
grew and was weaned, and Avraham made a great feast on the day that Yitzchak 
was weaned.” So Avraham prepared a feast and invited all the leaders of that 
generation. It is well known that at every feast, the supreme prosecutor is about, 
watching. And if there are any poor people in the house, he leaves that house 
and does not return there. However, if the prosecutor enters a house and sees 
rejoicing without the poor—without having first shown mercy to the poor—he 
ascends Above and brings accusations against the host of that feast. 

178. Because Avraham was the leader of his generation, the prosecutor 
descended from Heavens and stood at the door of his house, disguised as a 
poor man. And nobody so much as looked at him. Avraham was attending 
to kings and ministers, and Sarah was feeding all of their children, for they 
did not believe that she had born a child, but rather claimed that Yitzchak 
was a foundling, whom they had bought at the marketplace. This is why they 
brought their children with them, and Sarah nursed them in front of all. And 
the prosecutor stands at the door. Sarah said: “The Creator has made laughter 
for me” (“For anyone who hears will laugh on account of me” ( Beresheet , 
21:6). The prosecutor ascended at once and stood before the Creator, and said 
to Him, “O Master of the world, You have said that You love Avraham, and 
here he had prepared a feast, but had not given anything to You nor to the 
poor, had not sacrificed even a single pigeon for Your sake. And Sarah says 
that You have laughed at her.” 

Until the end of correction, it is impossible to fully rid oneself of die impure 
forces. Hence, however hard even the most exalted righteous may try to observe 
die Creator’s Mitzvot in purity of their altruistic intentions, without any touch 
of personal benefit, die impure forces can nonetheless accuse them and find 
faults in their observance of the Mitzvot. 

Therefore, the Creator prepared another opportunity for the righteous to 
silence the prosecutor—by bribing him with a certain portion of holiness and 
purity, thus silencing him. This way, the prosecutor is reluctant to accuse a 
righteous one and does not want him to disappear, for then the prosecutor, 
too, will be deprived of his part of holiness, the Light that he receives as the 
righteous one observes each Mitzvot. 



He Who Rejoices on Holidays 


361 


Hence, the need for external hair in Tefillin (phylacteries), scapegoat rite, red 
heifer, and so forth. ( The Zohar, Emor, p. 88). From this we see how extraordinary, 
multifaceted, and complex dais world is created, how impossible it is to judge 
human deeds and the Upper Governance by external manifestations, as they are 
seen by us, and how “entangled” and inseparably intertwined all die connections 
between die pure and impure forces really are. 

Even when we look at our great leaders-Kabbalists, we see how much they’ve 
suffered, how they were forced to submit to the will of petty rulers or ignorant 
masses, and how persecuted they were—those who were closest to the Creator! 
Everyone feels these obstacles, even those who are just beginning on their 
spiritual journey. 

But here, in the example of Avraham, The Zohar does not speak about an 
ordinary prosecutor, for Avraham had surely given food to all the poor, as he 
had always done even before he invited his distinguished guests to his table. But 
this prosecutor demanded his share of holiness, of the Light. However, Avraham 
did not wish to give anything of holiness to impurity. Rather, he wanted to 
overcome its power and push it away from himself completely. This is why the 
prosecutor ascended Above and accused Avraham. 

The Zohar tells us that the prosecutor was not really poor, but only disguised 
himself as such, and demanded to be treated at Avraham’s festive table. Avraham 
felt that this was an impure force that assumed the image of a poor man; hence, 
he refused to give it anything. 

This is why it is written: “He did not sacrifice even a single pigeon,” for 
in accordance to the sacrificial rites (rejection of egoistic parts, of man’s “I”), 
only two pigeons are offered, which symbolize the two combined points in 
Malchut: the property of Malchut that was corrected by the property of mercy, 
Bina. This common point contains both the properties of restriction and 
mercy, but the property of restriction is concealed, whereas the property of 
mercy is revealed (item 122). 

Without this combination of Malchut’s properties with those of Bina, 
called the “mitigation” or “sweetening” of Malchut, the world ( Malchut ) 
cannot exist, i.e., receive the Creator’s Light. Therefore, it is necessary to 
offer precisely two baby pigeons. One of them was sent by Noah from his 
Ark, never to return (Beresheet, 8), for one pigeon designates the property of 
restriction in Malchut that is unmitigated by Bina’ s property of mercy. And 
since Noah could not correct anything in her, the pigeon never returned to 
him (The Zohar Shlach, p. 52). 



362 


The Zohar 


The prosecutor’s claims and complaints concerning Avraham’s feast on the 
day when Yitzchak was weaned stem from his demand to receive his share, the 
corrections of the part of Malchut that cannot be corrected until Gmar Tikkun 
(the end of correction). And this is the property of the restriction within Malchut, 
with which the world cannot exist; hence, it must be concealed. This property is 
the pigeon that did not return to Noah. 

Man was not entrusted with the task of correcting his Creator-given 
primordial egoism, for it is impossible to alter what the Creator had made. 
However, man can hide his Malchut, his egoism (refrain from using it), and 
instead act by receiving his desires from Bina. This is why a combination of 
the properties of Malchut (egoism) and Bina (altruism) was formed in man—to 
let him make the effort and conceal the properties of Malchut, and act only 
according to the properties of Bina. 

When one is able to completely reject the use of his egoism and is guided 
only by the properties of Bina, he will achieve a state called “the end of his 
correction.” Correction is made during the 6,000 years, i.e., along the degrees 
of the 6,000 consecutive actions. 

Then, man’s M ashiach (Messiah/savior), the Upper Light, comes to him 
and transforms all of man’s egoism (the primordial nature that he was rejecting 
during the 6,000 years) into altruism. Then, one’s egoistic properties serve for 
the reception of the Light of pleasure for the Creator’s sake, and he no longer 
needs to refrain from using them. 

The property of Malchut, with which man cannot work for the Creator’s 
sake until his final correction, is referred to as “restriction.” Using the properties 
of Malchut herself remains forbidden until she is completely corrected through 
gradual purification by the properties of Bina during the 6,000 years. Alternatively, 
Malchut is called “strictness” or “judgment,” for this restriction is also the source 
of all punishments and prohibitions. 

Avraham could not correct this property of restriction in Malchut, i.e., 
receive the Light and fill Malchut entirely. Hence, he received nothing in this 
part, and that is exactly the way he treated the prosecutor, who ascended at 
once and began to accuse Avraham before the Creator, claiming that Avraham 
failed to correct anything in Malchut’s property of restriction with his feast. This 
property of restriction is called “poor,” for it does not receive Light; hence, it 
constitutes the essence of Malchut, her egoism. 

Since the Creator mitigated the restrictive property of Malchut with the 
property of mercy, and mixed Malchut with Bina for the sole purpose of giving the 



He Who Rejoices on Holidays 


363 


world an opportunity to exist, the Light that is received thanks to the property 
of mercy is defined as the part of Light belonging to all the world’s inhabitants. 
This part helps Malchut become corrected. Since the Creator created Malchut in 
order to personally fill her with Light, she is regarded as His personal part. 

As a result of a miracle of nursing the babies that were brought to Sarah, 
Avraham received all the Light that exists in the property of mercy, and began to 
doubt his ability to correct the poor part of Malchut. This part receives nothing 
(for it cannot be used during the 6,000 years) and constitutes the Creator’s 
personal part. 

Therefore, the prosecutor ascended, accusing Avraham of not giving to the 
poor, i.e., not giving to the part of the Creator, Malchut de Malchut herself, 
which no man can correct by himself, as even Noah was unable to do so. And 
he gave nothing to You nor to the poor, and sacrificed not even a single pigeon 
for Your sake. 

And Sarah says that You have laughed at her. Sarah is the part of Bina 
that shines in Malchut. With the words: “Any who hears will laugh on account 
of me” (Beresheet, 21:6), Sarah-Bina gave Malchut such powerful Ohr Hassadim 
that Malchut stopped feeling her egoistic desires, felt the perfection of altruism, 
and temporarily acquired the properties of Bina, while under the influence of 
Ohr Hassadim. 

However, there emerges fear that due to such a sense of perfection and 
absence of suffering from unfulfilled desires, the absence of the feeling of 
deficiency, Malchut would remain uncorrected. Such a state is similar to the 
following description of Adam’s state in the Torah ( Beresheet , 3:22): “Lest he 
put forth his hand, and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live forever.” 
In other words, he must not stop feeling his own nature nor forget the fact 
that he is obliged to correct his defect in the “Tree of Knowledge.” And that is 
why Adam was cast down into a place that is suitable for correction, the lowest 
possible egoistic place, called our world. 

179. The Creator said to him: “Who in the world is like Avraham?” And the 
prosecutor did not leave from there until he had consumed the entire fare. So 
the Creator decreed that Yitzchak is to be sacrificed. And He said that Sarah 
shall die from grief for her son. The cause of this grief is that he did not give 
anything to the poor. 

Yitzchak’s sacrifice was aimed at the correction of Malchut, to compensate 
for what Avraham could not correct at his great feast in honor of Yitzchak’s 
weaning. Sarah’s death was the result of the great Light that she passed to 



364 


The Zohar 


Malchut, saying: “The Creator has made laughter for me,” alluding to the Light 
that obstructs the correction of Malchut. 

Therefore, the Light that descends to Malchut and gives her the sensation of 
perfection prevents her from correcting herself. Hence, the Creator stopped it. 
This is the significance of Sarah’s death, for Sarah constitutes the Light of Bina 
that enters Malchut. Thus, all that the Torah speaks of is but the essence of the 
process of Malchut’s correction, until her correction is completed. 



The Torah and Prayer 


180. Rabbi Shimon opened and said: “It is written that Hizkiyahu (Hezekiah) 
turned his face to the wall and prayed to the Creator.” Let us see how great 
and potent the power of the Torah is, and how high it rises above all. He 
who engages in the Torah has no fear of those Above or below, nor of any 
hardships or illnesses of this world, for he is connected to the Tree of Life and 
learns from it each day. 

181. For the Torah teaches man how to walk a path of truth; it teaches him 
how to return to his Master and cancel what is predestined for him. And 
even if man is shown that what is predestined for him cannot be cancelled, 
it is nonetheless completely cancelled and annulled, then disappears at once 
and does not prevail over him in this world. Hence, man should study the 
Torah day and night, and never abandon it, as it is written: “Contemplate 
Him day and night.” Whomever abandons the Torah, it is as though he 
abandons the Tree of Life. 

“Contemplate Him day and night”—“Him” implies the Creator! In another 
place in The Zohar, it is said that Hizkiyahu’s prayer was accepted by the Creator, 
for nothing (no egoistic desires) separated him from the wall (the Shechina, the 
sensation of the Creator, akin to the Wailing Wall). 

This was the advice that he received from the Torah, when, through his 
efforts in the Torah, he realized how to achieve complete return to the Creator, 
whereby nothing would separate him from the Creator (from the wall, the 
Shechina, the sensation of the Creator). As a result, the decree of his death (the 
Light’s exit from the Partzuf) was revoked. So great is the power of the Torah. 

182. Come and see—such is the advice given to man. When he goes to bed at 
night, he must accept the Creator’s governance from Above, and wholeheartedly 


365 



366 


The Zohar 


entrust his soul with Him. Thus, man is immediately spared all the illnesses, 
slander, and evil eyes, and they will no longer have power over him. 

Here we come to a precise understanding of certain definitions from the 
Torah, which are quite different from the notions that we are accustomed to. 
Daylight signifies the sensation of unity with the Creator. It is called “Light,” for 
this is how man defines his good feelings. Therefore, daylight is when man feels 
closeness of the Creator and the greatness of spirituality. 

Darkness coincides with nighttime in our world. Accordingly, with regard 
to man’s spiritual states, darkness designates the absence of the sensation of the 
Creator, of the Upper Light, due to the actions of the impure, egoistic forces that 
separate man from the Creator. At night in our world, we sleep. The spiritual 
Partzuf is filled with the minimal amount of Light in an unconscious state called 
“sleep.” The amount of Light within the Partzuf is so little that it is defined as 
one sixtieth—6 (Sefirot of ZA) x 10 (in each part)—of death or complete absence 
of spiritual Light, for the impure forces rule here. 

Due to these two forces that govern and control us, we cannot completely 
and permanently merge with the Creator. As the result of our sensation of the 
state of night, the impure forces that rule at night impede us in our efforts, for 
their power over us keeps returning, thus creating gaps in our unity with the 
Creator and in our work for His sake. 

To correct this, Rabbi Shimon gives us his advice: every “night” (a feeling 
of separation from the spiritual), when man goes to “sleep” (sinks deeper into 
the sensations of this world), he must wholeheartedly accept the Creator’s 
governance, entrust himself completely under His rule. For if the night (the 
sensation of night) is corrected as in the act of creation, when day follows night, 
as it is said, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day,” both 
night and day become as a single whole. 

And the night, called “the rule of Malchut,” shall not mix with any impure 
force, and shall not attack man because of the disappearance of the sensation of 
the Creator on account of egoistic desires and obstacles of “reason.” For first, 
man has realized the necessity of the night for the attainment of the next day 
(greater sensation of the Creator, a bigger altruistic desire), and perceives these 
two states as a single whole and as an advancement, despite the fact that in his 
sensations, a night designates remoteness from spirituality. 

In the language of spiritual work, this means that if man feels remoteness 
from the Creator, and is therefore without joy, despite all the possible pleasures, 
for him this state is called “night.” It is precisely in such a state of complete 



The Torah and Prayer 


367 


absence of sensation and lack of faith in the Creator that man can, through his 
own effort, without feeling any taste in the Torah, yield before the Creator’s rule. 
That is, he closes his eyes (as one who goes to sleep) and says: “I bring myself 
under the Creator’s rule and submit to His will.” This state is called “descent 
for the sake of a subsequent ascent,” and serves as a springboard, by which man 
attains an even brighter “day.” 

However, to this end man must completely accept the Supernal Kingdom’s 
rule, so that nothing will separate him from the Creator. In other words, he 
must submit to the Supernal Rule unconditionally, whether it brings life or 
death, so that no force in the world will be able to stop him from uniting with 
the Supernal Ruler, as it is written, “Love your Creator with all your heart, with 
all your soul and with all your might” ( Devarim , 6:5). 

If man accepts everything that the Creator sends him with all his heart, he 
is certain that nothing will separate him from the Creator. This determines the 
fulfillment of the condition of entrusting one’s soul with the Creator. For he 
gives himself into the Creator’s hands in advance, by deciding to fulfill all His 
desires (commandments) to the fullest, right up to self-sacrifice. 

Hence, as man sleeps, when his soul (the sensation of the Creator), the 
Light that previously filled him, leaves his body (desires), he does not feel the 
taste of the sixtieth part of death, for the impure (egoistic) forces have no power 
over him. In other words, they do not separate him from the Creator. Rather, 
he merely fails to feel the Creator temporarily. 

Thus, the impure forces cannot interrupt his spiritual work even in the state 
called “night,” for his evening and morning are already as one day—the Creator’s 
Light. The night becomes a part of the day, for it is precisely because of the night 
that he recognizes his future merit of receiving an even greater Light. 

This is because his night stems not from the rule of the impure forces. 
Instead, he understands that the Creator intentionally sends him such states. 
Thus, even in such sensations as darkness and lack of feeling, absence of 
aspiration and taste for the spiritual, he sees an opportunity to merge with the 
Creator. And this means that nothing stands between him and the wall. 

183. And in the morning, when he rises from his bed, he must bless the 
Creator, enter His house, and bow before Him in fear and trepidation, and 
only then should he pray. He should take advice of his holy Patriarchs, as it is 
written, “By Your great mercy shall I come into Your house, to bow in fear of 
Your holy greatness.” 




368 


The Zohar 


Thanks to Your great kindness, I can now bless You for being merciful to 
me, for ending my spiritual descent, and for letting me come into Your house 
once more, for allowing me to feel You. However, I am happy not because my 
suffering gave way to pleasure, but because now I can thank You. I come to Your 
house so as to kneel in awe before Your holy greatness, which I now attain more 
than ever before. 

The prayer in our heart is the correction within Malchut (the Shechina, the 
sensation of the Creator, or the common soul of Israel), and the fulfillment 
of this common soul with the Upper Light (the sensation of the Creator), in 
accordance with all of its corrected desires. Hence, all our pleas are expressed 
in plural form, for we pray not for our own soul, but for the common soul of 
Israel. Naturally, all that is present in the Shechina is subsequently present in 
every soul of Israel, and vice versa, all that the common soul of Israel lacks is 
also absent in each soul. 

Therefore, before we start praying, we need to understand (feel) what is 
lacking in Malchut (the Shechina), to know what we need to correct in her and 
how we can fulfill her. Our heart, the center of our desires, is a part of this 
Malchut (the Shechina). All the generations of Israel are included in the common 
soul—the Shechina. However, we need not correct what has already been corrected 
by previous generations, but only what is left after those generations of souls. 

Our Patriarchs, the spiritual Partzufim called “Avraham, Yitzchakand Yaakov,” 
also known as the Sefirot Hesed, Gevura, and Tifferet of Partzuf ZA de Atzilut, 
include the entire community of Israel, all the properties that subsequently 
manifest in the corrected Malchut, who, in her corrected state, is called “Israel.” 
The Patriarchs designate the three spiritual roots of the 600,000 souls of Israel 
in all the generations. In other words, these are the three sources of desires born 
within man’s part of Malchut for the purpose of his correction. 

All the good deeds, the reception and bestowal of Light carried out by 
the “community of Israel” (by Kabbalists) in all the generations, first trigger 
reception of the Upper Light by our holy Patriarchs (Sefirot de ZA), for all the 
Upper Light descends through them from Above downwards. From them, this 
Upper Light descends onto the “community of Israel,” the righteous of that 
generation who exist with their properties in the worlds of BYA, and evoke the 
descent of this Light with their prayers. 

Such is the order of spiritual degrees: each branch can receive only through 
its root (the preceding, Higher Degree), but never independently. The main 
Light remains in the root, and only an insignificant part of it descends to the 




The Torah and Prayer 


369 


branch that evokes it. Therefore, all the corrections completed in the community 
of Israel (the Shechina, the common soul) are stored and preserved in the souls 
of our holy Patriarchs. 

(The Light received in the corrected Kelim remains forever within them. 
Our description of the Light’s exit and descent should be understood as a 
metaphor, for the Partzuf receives new empty desires that require correction, and 
the sensation of emptiness from the received empty desires is perceived as the 
Light’s departure. Nevertheless, upon correcting these newly received desires, in 
them the Partzuf wi 11 receive an even greater Light than before). 

Therefore, the essence of our prayer lies in supplementing the Shechina with 
whatever it needs to achieve complete correction, after all the previous corrections 
that were performed in it by the past generations of Kabbalists. Hence, he who 
spiritually ascends must first make all the corrections that have already been 
performed in the Shechina, and only then will he be able to recognize what is left 
for him to correct. 

This is why it is written that one cannot enter the Beit Knesset (synagogue, 
but in Hebrew it means “the house of assembly” or “the house of prayer,” from 
the word Kones— “to assemble”) before he assembles his prayer and asks the holy 
Patriarchs for guidance, for he needs to know what has already been corrected 
and what still needs to be corrected. This is possible only after he receives 
everything that the Patriarchs have corrected through the Shechina. Only then 
will he come to know what is left for him to correct in the Shechina. 

The Patriarchs have corrected the prayer in the Shechina. Prayer and the 
Shechina are one and the same, for prayer is a request, a raising of MAN, a Kli, the 
corrected Malchut or the desire for the Creator’s sake. The correction performed 
by Avraham is called Shacharit (the morning prayer), by Yitzchak— Mincha (the 
afternoon prayer), and by Yaakov— Arvit (the evening prayer). Therefore, one 
must first repeat in his prayer everything that was already corrected by them, 
and then he will discover how to construct his personal plea, and what other 
imperfections are left that only he can, and consequently, must correct. 

184. Man cannot enter the Beit Knesset (synagogue, house of prayer) unless 
he first receives permission from Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov, for they 
have corrected the prayer to the Creator. It is therefore written, “And in Your 
great mercy shall I enter into Your house” (T ehilim, 5:8). The aforesaid refers 
to Avraham, for his property is mercy, the Sefira Hesed. “I will bow before 
Your holy chamber” refers to Yitzchak, for thanks to him Malchut is called 
Heichal— chamber, the Sefira Qevura. “In fear and trepidation” refers to 



370 


The Zohar 


Yaakov, for his property is the Sefira Tifferet, called “fear.” And man must 
first enter into these properties, and only then enter the Beit Knesset to raise 
his prayers. Such a state is described by the verse, “Here is My slave, Israel, by 
whom I am adorned.” 

Here The Zohar analyzes the first three main corrections, made by the 
Patriarchs in the Shechina. Avraham corrected the property called Bait (house, 
permanent dwelling), which allows man to merge with it and to always exist in 
the Creator’s properties and sensations, just as he can always dwell in his house. 

Yitzchak complemented the correction and corrected Malchut in the 
property called the “holy temple,” so that the King Himself would always dwell 
in it, as a king always dwells in his chambers. Yaakov added to the correction 
by the property of fear, which corresponds to a gate in front of a house, and 
designates the condition that (if met) allows man to enter Malchut, Avraham’s 
house, and into Yitzchak’s holy temple that are both within her. 

Upon including within him all three corrections of the Patriarchs in full 
perfection, he attains what has already been corrected in the holy Shechina, and 
then proceeds to correct what has not been corrected. 

Avraham is the source of the property of mercy in the souls of Israel. 
Therefore, he corrected the holy Shechina in such a way that it could receive 
Ohr Hassadim, the Light of Mercy. And the Shechina received this Light in its 
entirety for all the souls of Israel. Had it remained this way, all the souls of 
Israel would have been in complete and eternal unity with the Creator, and 
the Shechina would have been filled with Light (pleasure). Thus, no man would 
ever wish to part with the Shechina (the sensation of the Creator) even for a 
single moment. 

Yet, Avraham’s entire correction consisted in the creation of a perfect, 
bestowing Kli, which consisted only of Ohr Hassadim. There was no way of 
corrupting its properties or introducing imperfection within it, for, just like 
Avraham’s property of mercy ( Hesed ), this Kli (desire) consisted only of the will 
to bestow upon, and please the Creator, as it is written: “Mine is yours and yours 
is yours designates the property of mercy” (Avot, 85). By imparting creation with 
his property, Avraham completely separated the impure forces (thoughts and 
desires) from the Shechina, and made it completely holy and pure. 

However, the Thought of Creation does not end here, for it lies in fulfilling 
the souls with delight. And the extent of pleasure depends on the aspiration to 
enjoy, on the degree of hunger. Only the extent of preliminary hunger, the will to 
receive pleasure, determines the extent of the subsequent reception of pleasure. 



The Torah and Prayer 


371 


The Shechina (Malchut de Atzilut, the sum of the souls) received its correction 
from Avraham—the Supernal force of Hassadim, the Sefira Hesed of ZA de Atzilut— 
and acquired the property of mercy from it. This property is completely free 
from any selfish will to receive, that is, its desire to receive something from the 
Creator has completely disappeared, and only the will to bestow upon Him 
remains. This desire is called “bestowal for the sake of bestowal.” However, this 
brought no correction to the souls (parts of the Shechina ), for their role is to 
receive the pleasure prepared for them by the Creator. To that end, they must 
first have the “will to receive.” After all, pleasure is felt only when preceded by 
an aspiration or desire for it, and is determined by the extent of this desire. 

It is hence written that Avraham fathered Yitzchak: Yitzchak found the 
Shechina in absolute spiritual perfection, in the property of pure selfless bestowal, 
filled with Ohr Hassadim because of all the corrections made by Avraham. 
However, in accordance with his properties, Yitzchak (the left spiritual force) 
felt imperfection in this state of the Shechina— that it was not yet corrected to 
“receive” all that was conceived in the Thought of Creation. 

Therefore, he corrected it by turning it into a Kli (vessel) of reception, 
by supplementing it with the will “to receive,” so that it could receive all the 
perfection prepared for it. Yitzchak evoked in the Shechina the will to receive 
pleasure from the Creator, albeit in the form of “reception for the Creator’s 
sake”—with the intention of receiving pleasure in order to delight Him. 

The reception for the Creator’s sake means that although man fervently 
wishes to receive pleasure, he receives not because he wishes to enjoy, but only 
because the bestowing Creator wishes for him to receive it. And had the Creator 
not wished it so, man would have no desire to receive from Him. 

Reception for the Creator’s sake is equivalent to selfless bestowal. Thus, the 
egoistic, impure force, cannot cling to such a desire. 

Hence, Yitzchak corrected the Shechina and brought it to complete perfection, 
for now it can receive all that the Creator conceived to bestow upon it, as this is 
the purpose of His creation. 

Thus, after being corrected by Yitzchak, the state of Malchut'Shechina is 
called Heichal (the Creator’s chambers), for now He can fill it with Himself, His 
Light, which means that He dwells in its halls. 

Yet, Avraham’s correction, called “house,” did not yet allow the Shechina to 
be filled and worthy of the Creator’s presence. Hence, Yitzchak is considered 
to have corrected all the Gevurot (willpower and resistance to egoism in the 
souls of Israel). This means that he mitigated all the laws and restrictions in the 




37 2 


The Zohar 


Creator’s governance. This is because all restrictions and punishments come into 
this world for the sole purpose of correcting the souls’ will to receive, to make 
them suitable for reception of the infinite goodness contained in the Thought 
of Creation. And since Yitzchak corrected the Shechina to complete perfection, 
all its restrictions and forces have been corrected, and all of its properties have 
attained the desired goal. 

However, his correction, too, did not retain this form in the Shechina, and 
became corrupted, for the world was still unprepared for the end of correction. 
Hence, Yitzchak fathered a sinner, Esav, who, being unable to resist the temptation 
to receive for himself, corrupted Yitzchak’s correction in the Shechina. Unlike 
Yitzchak, he could not resist the selfish reception. This means that even when it 
became clear to him that the bestowing Creator did not wish for him to receive, 
he wanted to receive nonetheless, for such was his desire of self-gratification. 

Therefore, the impure force (Klipot-shells, the husk, or rind surrounding 
the pure forces) clung to the Shechina. Thus, the legs (Sefirot NHYM) of Partzuf 
Malchut de Atzilut descended to the place of the Klipot below Parsa, where egoistic 
desires dominate the desires of NHYM. 

Yet, the Rosh and the Upper Part of the Guf down to the Tabur of Partzuf 
Malchut remained above the rule of the impure forces. Hence, his head (Rosh) 
understands how he should act (hence, Yitzchak’s head is buried together with 
the bodies of Avraham and Yaakov in the M achpela cave), but the body (Guf) still 
wants to receive pleasure for its own sake. 

And since Yaakov saw the damage caused by Esav, he corrected the Shechina 
by adding his property of fear to it, as it is written: “His hand had hold on Esav’s 
heel” (The Torah, Bereshee t, 25:26). Because Yaakov realized what imperfection 
Esav had caused in Shechina (in the created souls), he corrected himself in fear 
to such an extent that he raised the holy Shechina as a crown-adornment. By this 
he also retained the corrections made by Avraham and Yitzchak. 

However, Yaakov’s correction was not final, for this fear is more similar to 
the fear of transgression than the selfless fear that comes from within. For this 
fear of his is born in him from Esav’s hip, even though he had not transgressed 
by receiving, as did Esav. But the end of correction will bring a different state: 
Esav’s hip will be annulled, as it is written: “Death will forever vanish from the 
world,” and fear will remain only because the Creator is almighty and great. 

Yaakov attained this genuine fear by himself. However, the entire “community 
of Israel,” all the souls that form the Shechina, still need to correct themselves 
in all the generations, from the first to the last, to the end of correction. (Only 



The Torah and Prayer 


373 


Moshe attained the property of true fear—one out of greatness and love—only 
he, and no one else. Hence, as the Talmud says, description of fear out of love 
for the Creator doesn’t even exist.) 

The Zohar cites the words of the Psalm (5:8): “By Your great mercy I shall 
come into Your house,” since Avraham corrected the Shechina up to the property 
of a “house” that is filled with goodness, i.e., with Ohr Hassadim. The words, 
“So as to bow before Your holy chamber,” refer to Yitzchak, who corrected the 
Shechina from a “house” to a “chamber” that befits the Creator. The words, 
“in fear” refer to Yaakov, who corrected the Shechina with his property of fear, 
whereupon he made it a Kli (vessel) of reception that includes all the corrections 
made by Avraham and Yitzchak. 

Yet, how did he find out what else needed correction in the Shechina? Only 
by correcting and including himself in these three corrections performed by the 
holy Patriarchs before him. This means that, just as they did, Yaakov can act 
according to the conditions of these corrections. In other words, Yaakov merged 
with their properties, thereby ascending to their level. 

Thus, man must first attain these properties and correct them within him. 
Only after he assumes the properties of these three corrections into himself can 
he start correcting them from where our Patriarch Yaakov left off, i.e., elevating 
fear to the extent of the Creator’s greatness and omnipotence, and drawing the 
Upper Light with his prayer, with his awe of the Creator’s greatness. And the 
Upper Light will bring with it the fulfillment of the Shechina and the end of 
its correction. Hence, man’s prayer must include two objectives: to obtain fear 
of the Creator’s true greatness, and with this attainment, to achieve the final 
correction of his egoism. 




Rabbi Shimon’s Departure from the Cave 


185. Rabbi Pinchas stood before Rabbi Rachuma on the shore of Lake 
Kinneret. He was wise, old, and almost blind. He said to Rabbi Pinchas: “I 
have heard that our friend Shimon Bar-Yochai has a jewel, a son. I have looked 
upon the Light from that jewel, and it shines like the light of the sun, and 
illuminates the entire world.” 

A fully corrected Malchut is called a jewel (usually a pearl). Rabbi Nachum 
tells Rabbi Pinchas that Rabbi Shimon has already merited complete correction, 
for a “son” designates the next state, the next Partzuf that emerges or is born 
from the preceding one. And Rabbi Pinchas sees this while looking (with his 
spiritual sight, called Ruach HaKodesh —the Holy Spirit) at the Light of this pearl, 
which shines like the sun emerging from its hiding (Nartik— sheath). This means 
that after the future correction of Malchut (the moon), her Light will become 
like that of the sun, and will illuminate the entire world. 

And when the Light of the moon becomes like that of the sun, it will rise to 
the zenith and illuminate the whole world with a pillar of Light, from Heaven 
to earth. And it will shine until Rabbi Shimon completes the correction of At ik. 
This speaks to the fact that he has already merited attaining the degrees of the 
Creator’s two revelations, i.e., the end of correction. 

186. And that Light extends from the Heavens down to the earth and 
illuminates the whole world until Atik-Keter appears and sits upon its throne, 
which occurs at the end of correction. And that Light abides entirely in your 
household (for the daughter of Rabbi Pinchas was wife to Rabbi Shimon, and 
Rabbi Elazar was therefore his grandson). And a tiny ray of Light (called “the 
son of the household,” Rabbi Elazar) separates from the Light that fills the 
household, comes forth and shines upon the whole world. Happy are those 

375 



376 


The Zohar 


who merit such a destiny! Come out, my son, come out! Go after that jewel, 
which illuminates the world, for it is a good time to do so! 

Since the daughter of Rabbi Pinchas was the wife of Rabbi Shimon (Rabbi 
Shimon and his wife designate two spiritual Partzufim that are below Rabbi 
Pinchas), Rabbi Shimon (together with his wife) belonged to the household 
(was included in the Partzuf) of Rabbi Pinchas. This refers to Rabbi Elazar, the 
Partzuf that emerged from the Light and illuminated the world, which filled 
the household (ten Sefirot) of Rabbi Pinchas, i.e., came out of the Partzuf called 
“Rabbi Shimon and his wife.” 

187. He came out before him and stood waiting to board a ship. Two women 
were with him. He saw two birds soaring over the water. He raised his voice 
and said, “Birds, you soar over the sea; have you seen the place where one 
could find Bar-Yochai?” He waited some and said, “Birds, O birds, fly away.” 
They flew away and disappeared into the sea. 

Rabbi Shimon fled from the authorities that condemned him to death, and 
hid in a cave with his son. And no one knew where he was. Therefore, Rabbi 
Pinchas set out to look for him. 

Although everything described here is historically true, it is nonetheless 
essential for us to understand the words of The Zohar as the actions of Supernal 
spiritual causes, whose consequences determine all that transpires on earth. 
The egoistic authorities (forces) of a Partzuf as exalted as Rabbi Shimon’s try 
to overcome his own altruistic aspirations and deprive him of the Light, that 
is, to kill him. And he hides from them in a cave, i.e., assumes a small state 
(Katnut) and shines with the Light of Mercy. This is referred to as “hides in 
a cave”—becomes invisible to egoistic forces, for they desire O hr Hochma and 
cannot see Ohr Hassadim. 

188. Before he boarded the ship, the birds approached again, and in the beak 
of one of them was a letter. It read that Rabbi Shimon, the son of Yochai, had 
left the cave together with his son, Rabbi Elazar. Rabbi Pinchas went to them 
and found them completely changed: their bodies were covered with sores 
(like holes in the ground—see the Talmud, Bava Batra, 19:2) from staying in 
the cave for so long. He wept and said, “Woe that I have seen you so!” Rabbi 
Shimon replied: “O how happy is my lot that you have seen me so, for had 
you not seen me so, I would not have been what I am!” Rabbi Shimon opened 
about the M itzvot of the Torah and said, “The Mit^vot of the Torah that the 
Creator gave to Israel are all described in a general form.” 




Rabbi Shimon’s Departure from the Cave 


377 


While staying in the cave (in Ohr Hassadim) for many years (degrees), Rabbi 
Shimon had no choice but to sit in the sand (the external garment —Levush 
covering the Partzuf with a particular property, called “earth”) in order to cover 
his naked body (desires) so he could study the Torah (receive the Upper Light in 
his Partzuf with the intention for the Creator’s sake). As a result of being covered 
with sand, his entire “body” was covered with “rust and sores” (but these were 
necessary corrections). 

And not only did the Partzuf called Rabbi Shimon need the correction of 
concealment in Hassadim (cave) and the cover of an external garment (Returning 
Light), but his next state, fathered by him, called his son, Rabbi Elazar (a lower 
Partzuf), also needed these corrections to attain all of the Creator’s Light. 

He wept and said: “Woe that I have seen you so!” Rabbi Shimon replied: 
“O how happy is my lot that you have seen me so, for had you not seen me so, 
I would not have been what I am!” In other words, it I would not look as I do, I 
would not have merited all the secrets of the Torah, for all that I have attained, 
I have attained during those thirteen years (thirteen successive corrections) of 
hiding in the cave. 

Rabbi Shimon opened. It is written of the Mitzvot of the Torah: “The Mitzvot 
of the Torah that the Creator gave to Israel are all described in a general form.” 
All of the Mitzvot of the Torah are described in the passage from the Torah, 
starting with “In the beginning the Creator created” and ending with “Let there 
be Light.” These are the Mitzvot of fear and punishment, which include all the 
Mitzvot of the Torah. This is why they are called “in general.” 




The First Commandment 


189. BERESHEET BARAH ELOKIM (In the beginning the Creator created) 
is the first Mitzva (commandment), the root and foundation of everything. 
And it is called “fear of the Creator” or Resheet (beginning), as it is written: 
“Fear of the Creator is the beginning of wisdom.” Fear of the Creator is the 
beginning of wisdom, for this fear is called “the beginning.” And it is the gate 
that leads to faith. And the whole world is based on this Mitzva. 

It is difficult to understand why fear is called “the beginning,” and why it 
precedes wisdom and faith. The Zohar answers: it is because fear is the beginning 
of every Sefira, and it is impossible to attain any Sefira (property) without first 
attaining the property of fear. Yet, this implies that fear is merely a means of 
attaining other qualities or properties. But then, if it is only a means, then why 
is it included in the list of Mitzvot (plural for Mitzva) as the first Mitzva ? Can it 
be that fear is a kind of prerequisite? 

Therefore, The Zohar says that it is impossible to attain perfect, selfless faith 
in any way other than through fear of the Creator. And the extent of fear will 
determine the extent of faith. Hence, the whole world is based on the Mitzva 
of fear, for the whole world exists only thanks to the Torah and Mitzvot, as 
the prophet said: “If not for My union with day and night, I would not have 
appointed the ordinances of Heaven and earth” (Yirmiyahu, 33:25). 

And since fear is the beginning and the gate to the other Mitzvot (for fear 
is also the gate to faith), the whole world is based on this property of fear. It 
is hence written that the Mitzva of fear includes all of the other Mitzvot of the 
Torah; and were it not for fear, the Creator would not have created anything. 

190. There are three types of fear, two of which have no real basis, but one 
does. If man fears that his children may die, or fears illness or bodily suffering, 
or fears for his material well-being, this kind of fear (even if constant) is not 
the basis or root, for only desirable consequences constitute the cause of fear. 


379 



380 


The Zohar 


This is called “the fear of punishment in this world.” But there is also another 
type of fear: the fear of punishment in the world to come, in hell. These 
two types of fear—the fear of punishment in this world and in the world to 
come—do not constitute real basis and root. 

191. The real fear is the fear of the Creator, for He is great and almighty, for 
He is the Source of everything, and all else is nothing compared to Him. Man 
should concentrate all his attention on attaining this kind of fear. 

There are three kinds of fear before the Creator, but only one of them is 
considered true fear. If one is afraid of the Creator, and observes His Mitzvot so 
he and his children will be well and prosperous, this constitutes the first kind, 
the fear of the various punishments in this world. If he observes the Creator’s 
Mitzvot because he fears punishments in hell, this is the second kind of fear. The 
Zohar says that neither of these two kinds is true, for man observes the Mitzvot 
only out of fear of punishment, for the sake of his own benefit, and not because 
these are the Creator’s Mitzvot. 

In this case, his personal wellbeing is the cause of his observance, and his 
fear is merely a consequence of his will to receive pleasure. Rather, true fear 
must stem from the Creator’s greatness and omnipotence, for He rules over all 
and is the source of everything. All the worlds emerge from Him, and His deeds 
testify to His greatness. And all that He created is nothing compared to Him, 
for it adds nothing to Him. 

Thus, we can plainly see that there is no difference in action: one observes 
out of the first or second kinds of fear, while the other observes out of the third 
kind. To an onlooker, they perform the same actions, the Creator’s Mitzvot. 
But the enormous difference between them lies only in their intention, their 
motivation—why they observe the Creator’s decree! 

Hence, it is impossible to discern man’s spiritual degree by his external 
observance of the Mitzvot, which is visible to all. Moreover, those who observe 
them in order to receive an immediate reward from others usually do so with 
the utmost outward zeal. But one whose intentions and thoughts are directed 
inwardly, who seeks true observance, as a rule, does not stand out amidst the 
masses in any way. 

One must constantly seek to perfect and complement his intentions only 
by observing the Mitzvot at an increasingly deeper level, while focusing on inner 
contemplation and direction of his thoughts. In no way should he engage in 
excessive “mechanical observance,” on which there is a clear prohibition: “Do 
not exaggerate in the Mitzvot.” 



The First Commandment 


381 


On the contrary, one must devote all his attention to the attainment of true 
fear, as the Creator’s first M itzva decrees. As Rabbi Baruch Ashlag said, “Fear 
of the Creator is the constant, selfless desire that is expressed in the thought: 
‘Have I done everything I could for the Creator, or is there anything more that 
I can do for Him?’” 

192. Rabbi Shimon started to weep, wailing, “Woe if 1 reveal and woe 
if 1 do not reveal. If I say, the sinners will know how to work for the 
Creator’s sake, and if I do not say, it will not reach my friends.” Wherever 
there is true fear, opposite it and correspondingly below stands an evil fear, 
which strikes and prosecutes. It is the scourge that whips the sinners 
(punishing them for their sins). This is why he is afraid to reveal it, for the 
sinners may learn how to avoid punishment, and punishment constitutes 
their correction! 

Here Rabbi Shimon warns that he cannot reveal everything in its entirety 
(this refers to Avoda Lishma —work “for the Creator’s sake”), for he fears it may 
harm the sinners. Here he wishes to reveal how one can draw nearer and merge 
with the Tree of Life, and therewith refrain from touching the Tree of Death. 
However, this refers only to those who have already corrected themselves with 
regard to the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. 

Nevertheless, the sinners (those who have yet to correct their transgressions 
in the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil) are not entitled to know this, for 
they still need to toil in all the required tasks until they correct themselves in 
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Thus we see that the Torah defines a 
sinner as one who is yet to correct the Tree of Knowledge in his soul. 

The prohibition on revealing the true essence of the work for the Creator’s 
sake is based on the words of the Torah: “Behold, Adam has become as one of 
us in knowledge of good and evil; and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take 
also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live forever” (Bereshee t, 3:22). 

After Adam’s sin in the Tree of Knowledge, the Creator banished him 
from the Garden of Eden to prevent Adam from connecting to the Tree of Life 
and gaining eternal life. This is because then, what he corrupted in the Tree 
of Knowledge would remain uncorrected. Therefore, to let only the righteous 
know this wisdom, Rabbi Shimon reveals it by way of allusion. 

193. But he who fears the punishment by whippings, the true fear of the 
Creator cannot descend upon him. Instead, evil fear overtakes him in the 
form of fearing punishment by whipping. 



382 


The Zohar 


194. Therefore, the place that is named “fear of the Creator” is called the 

beginning of knowledge. This is why this is included here. And it is 

the foundation and source of all the other M itzvot of the Torah. And whoever 
observes the Mit^va of fear of the Creator, thereby observes all the others. But 
he who does not observe the M itzva of fear of the Creator, does not observe 
the other Mitzvot of the Torah, for this Mitzva constitutes the foundation for 
all the others. 

Here The Zohar repeats that in one place it is written, “Fear of the Creator 
is the beginning of wisdom,” while in another it says, “Fear of the Creator is the 
beginning of knowledge.” And The Zohar explains that where the property of 
fear ends, another evil fear begins, one that slanders and whips. In this regard, 
it is said in Kabbalah that the legs of a pure Partzuf Malchut descend to a place 
of impure forces. 

However, he who observes the M itzva of fear because the Creator is great 
and almighty unites with Him (becomes equal to the Creator in his properties), 
so as to not feel shame in receiving from Him. Besides this correction, no other 
work exists for the creatures. 

This is called “fear of the Creator for the sake of life,” for as a result of 
merging with the Creator, creatures are filled with life. Otherwise, they fall 
under the power of the restriction, as Tzimtzum Aleph (first restriction) restricted 
the reception of Light in egoistic desires. Such a Kli (desire) becomes a cause 
of death, for it is an empty place (devoid of Light). Hence, creatures must fear 
failing to make the corrections that they were entrusted with. 

However, those who observe the Mitzvot out of fear, rather than out of 
realization of the Creator’s greatness and His decree, are ruled and whipped by 
the fear of an empty Malchut. And since the end of fear lies in the evil scourge, 
true fear is called “The beginning of knowledge of the fear of the Creator,” 
which indicates the necessity to aspire only to this kind of fear, and beware of 
the evil kind. Because of this, Adam’s sin is corrected. 

195. Therefore, it is written, IN THE BEGINNING (signifying fear) THE 
CREATOR CREATED THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH. For whoever 
transgresses here, transgresses all of the Torah Mitzvot. And his punishment 
is the evil scourge, i.e., the evil fear that whips him. The words, AND THE 
EARTH WAS UNFORMED AND CHAOTIC, AND DARKNESS WAS 
UPON THE FACE OF THE DEEP, AND THE SPIRIT OF THE CREATOR 
refer to the four punishments of the wicked. 



The First Commandment 


383 


196. WITHOUT FORM refers to strangulation. CHAOTIC refers to stoning, 
i.e., the stones that fall into the great deep to punish the sinners. DARKNESS 
signifies burning, the fire that falls upon the heads of the wicked to burn 
them down. THE SPIRIT OF THE CREATOR refers to beheading. 

Those who observe the Mitzva of fear before the Creator not because such is 
His decree, but because they are afraid of punishment, fall into the impure force’s 
trap, called “without form.” As a result, they are lost, having no understanding 
of the Creator’s thoughts and deeds. And this impure force is defined as a rope 
on man’s neck, blocking the inflow of pure (holy) air to his soul and preventing 
him from gaining life. And to the extent of man’s ignorance, the impure force 
strangulates him! 

And when he is caught in the impure force’s noose, tightening around his 
neck, it has the power to control man at its will: to stone, burn, or behead him. 
Stoning means that impure thoughts befall his head with desired pleasures, 
thus pulling him down into the deep. There they punish him with darkness 
(burning), and the impure force turns him on fierce fire until it burns all the 
pure life-force out of him. 

197. The spirit of the Creator means beheading, for the scorching wind 
(Ruach Se’ara) is a flaming sword—punishment for whoever does not observe 
the Torah and Mitzvot that are mentioned after the Mitzva of fear, called 
“foundation,” as it includes all the Mitzvot. This is because after the word 
BERESHEET (BEGINNING), which signifies fear, it is written WITHOUT 
FORM, CHAOS, DARKNESS and SPIRIT—in all, the four penalties of death. 
And then follow the rest of the Torah and Mitzvot. 

Following the first sentence of the Torah, the remaining part of the Torah 
refers to the rest of the Mitzvot, which are particular with regard to the general 
and all-inclusive Mitzva of fear. 




The Second Commandment 


198. The second (commandment) is inseparably connected with the 

Mit^va of fear, and it is the Mit^va of love—for man to love his Creator with 
perfect love. What is perfect love? It is a great love, as it is written, “He walks 
before the Creator in complete sincerity and perfection” ( Beresheet , 17:1), 
which signifies perfection in love. Thus, it is written, “And the Creator said, 
‘Let there be Light’” ( Beresheet , 1:3)—this is perfect love, called “great love.” 
This is precisely how man should love his Creator. 

There exists conditional love, which appears as a result of all the goodness 
received from the Creator (“Introduction to The Study of Ten Sefirot,” items 
66-74), as a result of which man merges with the Creator with all his heart and 
soul. Yet, although he merges with the Creator in complete perfection, this 
love is considered imperfect. It is similar to Noah’s love (Beresheet Raha, 30), 
who constantly needed to reinforce his feeling—to see that the Creator sends 
him only goodness. 

Avraham, however, needed nothing to reinforce his love for the Creator, 
as it is written: “He walks before the Creator in complete perfection.” For the 
words “walks before” mean that he needs nothing to reinforce his feeling of love 
for the Creator. And even if he does not receive anything from Him, his love 
remains constant and perfect, and he wishes to merge with the Creator with his 
heart and soul. 

199. Rabbi Elazar said, “I have heard what perfect love means.” He was told, 
“Tell this to Rabbi Pinchas, as he truly exists on that degree.” Rabbi Elazar 
said, “Perfect love means that it is perfect on both sides; if it does not include 
both sides, such a love is imperfect.” 

He was told to turn to Rabbi Pinchas, for Rabbi Pinchas had already 
attained the degree of perfect love and will be able understand him correctly. 


385 



386 


The Zohar 


The words “on both sides” refer to both the good side and the evil side. In other 
words, if the Creator gives him not only goodness, but restrictions, too (which 
he perceives as unpleasant), and even it He takes his soul away, still man’s love 
for the Creator remains perfect, as though he receives from Him nothing but 
the very best in the world. 

200. Therefore, there is he who loves the Creator in order to gain riches, 
live a long life, have many healthy children, and rule over his enemies—he 
receives everything he wants, and this is why he loves the Creator. However, 
should he receive the opposite, should the Creator lead him through a wheel 
of suffering, he will come to hate the Creator, and will feel no love toward 
Him whatsoever. Therefore, such a love is baseless. 

Since his love depends on what he receives from the Creator, when 
reception stops, so does his love. Clearly, man can love only one or the other— 
himself or the Creator! 

201. Love is considered perfect if it exists on both sides—on the side of judgment 
and the side of mercy (success in life). As we already mentioned, when one 
loves the Creator, even if He were to take away his soul, this love would remain 
perfect on both sides: mercy and judgment. Therefore, the Light of the 
First Act of Creation was revealed and then concealed. And because of this 
concealment, strict judgment appeared in the world, and both sides, mercy 
and judgment, united to form perfection. And this is the desired love. 

The Light that was created on the first day of creation (in the verse “Let there 
be Light”) was later concealed, as it is written, for the righteous in the world to 
come. It was concealed so as to let strict judgment appear in this world. 

This leads to the unification of the two sides (mercy and judgment) into one, 
for man receives an opportunity to reveal the perfection of love even when the 
Creator takes his soul away, and he is given an opportunity to supplement and 
perfect his love. And had the Light not been concealed, strict judgment would 
not have been revealed, and the GREAT LOVE would have been concealed 
from the righteous, and there would be no way of revealing it. 

202. Rabbi Shimon kissed him. Rabbi Pinchas approached, kissed and blessed 
him. He said, “It is clear that the Creator has sent me here. This is the tiny 
ray of Light that was said to be shining in my house, and would later light up 
the whole world” (item 186). Rabbi Elazar said that fear must certainly not be 
forgotten from all the M itzvot', especially in this Mitzya, the M itzva of love, 
fear must be attached to this M itzva at all times. How is it attached? Love is 



The Second Commandment 


387 


good when it brings goodness, health, sustenance, and life from the Beloved 
One. And it is here that fear of sinning must be revived, so that the wheel does 
not turn against him, as it is written, “Happy is the man who always fears,” 
for his fear is contained in his love. 

203. This is how fear should be evoked from the perspective of strict judgment, 
for once man realizes that strict judgment hovers over him, he must evoke 
within him fear of his Master. Thus, his heart will not be hardened, of which 
it is written, “He that hardens his heart shall fall into evil,” into the other 
side. This is called evil. Therefore, fear unites with both sides—with goodness 
and love, as well as with strict judgment, and consists of both. And if fear is 
united with the good side and love, as well as with the strictness of judgment, 
such a love is perfect. 

The Mitzva of fear includes all the M itzvot of the Torah; it is the gateway to 
faith in the Creator—to the extent of his fear, man acquires faith in the Creator’s 
governance. Hence, he must not forget fear in observing every Mitzva, especially 
the Mitzva of love, at which time fear needs to be roused even more, for fear 
must constantly be present in the Mitzva of love. Therefore, man must evoke 
fear within him in the two states of love: in love from the good side, when he 
receives good sensations from the Creator, and in love from the evil side, when 
the Creator sends him harsh restrictions, according to judgment. 

However, it would be incorrect to think that perfect love means a state 
where one receives bad feelings from the Creator, to the extent of feeling one’s 
soul being taken away. It is incorrect to think that one should not fear the 
Creator’s judgment and strictness, and, despite his feelings to cling unto Him 
with love, fearlessly and wholeheartedly. 

First, one must rouse fear within him lest his love for the Creator will 
weaken. Thus, he combines love and fear. Second, from the other side of love, 
from the side of feeling the strictness, he must rouse within him fear before 
the Creator, and not let his heart harden, so it would not stop heeding the 
unpleasant sensations of punishment. Thus, here, too, he includes fear and 
love, and if he acts so in both sides of love, his love remains forever connected 
to fear, thus becoming perfect. 

It is written about the good side’s inclusion of fear into love: “Happy is 
the man who always fears.” The word “always” indicates that although man 
always receives only goodness from the Creator, he fears Him nonetheless, for 
he fears that he may sin. 



388 


The Zohar 


And it is written about the evil side’s inclusion of fear into love, when man 
feels punishments and strictness of judgment: “He who lets his heart be hardened 
shall fall into awe.” This means that one should in no way and under no circum¬ 
stances let his heart be hardened under the judgment’s influence. Otherwise, he 
will fall into the impure forces, called “evil.” In such a case, he must rouse within 
him even more fear of the Creator, and mingle his fear into the love. 

However, neither kind is fear for oneself, for one’s own well-being. Rather, 
they both refer to man’s fear of diminishing his intentions and actions for the 
Creator’s sake, and his attempts to direct them all towards pleasing Him. 

Thus, we have clarified the first two Mitzvot of the Torah—the M itzvot of fear 
and love. The Mitzva of fear is the basis for all the other Mitzvot and of the entire 
Torah. It is contained in the first word of the Torah, BERESHEET (IN THE 
BEGINNING), and in its first sentence, IN THE BEGINNING THE CREATOR 
CREATED THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH. Fear is called BEGINNING, 
from which THE HEAVENS and THE EARTH are born, meaning ZON and 
their descendants, the worlds of BYA. And the second sentence in the Torah 
refers to punishment in the form of four kinds of spiritual death: WITHOUT 
FORM means strangulation, CHAOTIC means stoning, DARKNESS means 
burning, and SPIRIT means beheading. The Mitzva of love is described in the 
Torah in the verse: AND THE CREATOR SAID, ‘LET THERE BE LIGHT.’ 

There are two sides to this Mitzva, which are called “kindness and longevity” 
and “with all one’s soul.” This implies that man should feel love even under the 
worst kinds of circumstances, i.e., when the Creator takes his soul away, just as 
he feels it when everything is well. 

Just to reveal this perfect love, the Light of creation was concealed. Fear must 
also be included in both sides of love: in the part where man must fear to commit 
a sin, thereby reducing his love for the Creator, and in the part where he must fear 
because of the concealment and the Creator’s judgment. Yet, to understand these 
spiritual categories, we must clarify them in a slightly different manner. 

Calls for love are used repeatedly in the Torah: “Love thy neighbor...,” “Do 
not do what you hate to another,” and so on. But the basis of all this is love 
between man and the Creator; this is where our requests are directed: “Draw us 
nearer with love...,” “He who chooses Israel with love...” 

The revelation of the Creator is the revelation of His love for man. However, 
altruistic love is completely different from our understanding of love. Our love 
always relies on egoistic reasons. And should the reasons suddenly disappear, 
love disappears at once. 




The Second Commandment 


389 


We can take as an example the natural love between father and son. Parents 
naturally love their only son more than anything in the world. Accordingly, the 
son should hold the same kind of love for his parents. Yet, we see that this is not 
so: if the son feels unconditional love from his parents, then, in accordance with 
nature’s law and regardless of himself, his love for them will decrease. 

This is so because the father’s love for his son is natural; and just as the 
father wants his son to love him, his son wants to be loved by his father. This 
reciprocal desire gives rise to fear in both their hearts: the father is afraid that 
the son may hate him (even a little), and the son fears the same. 

This constant fear begets good deeds between them: each of them aspires 
to show his love to the other, so as to promote reciprocity. Yet, when their love 
reaches peaks, and there is nothing else that can be added to it, the beloved son 
discovers absolute and unconditional love in the heart of his loving father. 

The loved one immediately stops fearing that he will be loved less; neither 
can he hope that the love for him will grow. And this leads to a situation where 
the son grows lazy and stops expressing his love with good deeds. And as they 
lessen, his love lessens, too, until it is reversed into its opposite—hatred, for he 
deems everything his father does as worthless and insufficient in comparison 
with what the father’s actions out of “absolute” love should be. Therefore, the 
union of love and fear within man brings him to the state of perfection. 

The four letters HaVaYaH (Yod + Hey + Vav + Hey) correspond to Sefirot 
H-B- ZA-M. The Zohar calls them, FEAR, LOVE, TORAH, COMMAND¬ 
MENT, respectively. 


YOD 

- HOCHMA 

- FEAR 

HEY 

- BINA 

- LOVE 

VAV 

- ZA 

- TORAH 

HEY 

- MALCHUT 

- COMMANDMENT 


Partzuf AA is the main Partzuf, and includes the entire world of Atzilut. It 
shines upon all the other worlds through its garments, called AVI, YESHSUT and 
ZON, where AVI and YESHSUT clothe AA from its Peh to Tabur, while ZON 
clothe AA from Tabur down to its Sium Raglaim (end of legs) that stand on Parsa. 

AA is called “the concealed Hochma,” as its Ohr Hochma is concealed in 
its Rosh and does not shine upon the other Partzufim and worlds, and only its 
Bina shines below. Thus, it is Bina (and not AA) that is called BERESHEET— 
BEGINNING, for she is the foundation and the source of all the worlds. 



390 


The Zohar 


And she is also called FEAR OF THE CREATOR, i.e., fear of His greatness, 
“for He is the only Master and the root of all, and all that exists is as nothing 
compared to Him.” And ZON (called HEAVEN AND EARTH) emerge from 
Bina. It is therefore written in the Torah, IN THE BEGINNING (with fear) AVI, 
THE CREATOR CREATED HEAVEN (ZA) AND EARTH (Malchut). 

Hence, it is said: “Fear of the Creator is the beginning of wisdom ( Hochma )” 
and “Fear of the Creator is the beginning of knowledge (Daat).” Ohr Hochma 
stems not from the Sefira Hochma de AA, but from Bina de AA alone. For when 
Bina de AA ascends to Rosh de AA, it turns to the Sefira Hochma and then passes the 
Light downward. It follows that the Sefira Bina, fear of the Creator, is the source of 
Ohr Hochma ; hence, it is said, “Fear of the Creator is the beginning of Hochma.” 

Also, fear is the beginning of knowledge, for the Sefira Daat is the beginning 
of ZON: ZON raise their request to Rosh de AA in order to receive Hochma. 
And this request of ZON regarding reception of Ohr Hochma, which is received 
and felt by AA, is called Daat, knowledge. This is why it is written: “Fear of the 
Creator is the beginning of knowledge (Daat).” 

The Zohar also tells us that afterwards fear and love unite so as never to part 
again, for Hochma is called “love.” Indeed, the letter Yod of the name HaVaYaH 
is Bina, i.e., GAR de Bina (AVI) that wants only Ohr Hassadim, whereas Ohr 
Hochma is concealed within it. 

And the place of revelation of Ohr Hochma is ZAT de Bina, called YESHSUT, 
the first letter Hey of the name HaVaYaH. Therefore, this place is called love, 
and it is the second Mitzva that follows the first Mitzva of fear, which shines in 
ZON, for this Ohr Hochma does not stem from Hochma de AVI, but from Bina, 
and Bina is known as fear. 

And The Zohar says that fear unites with love so as to never let it go. This 
means that Bina forever unites with Hochma and does not part with it. And 
wherever there is Bina, Hochma is there alongside her. And although it seems to 
write that one Mitzva is fear and another is love (that these are separate Mit^yot), 
they are nonetheless always together and are never apart: just as the first Mitzva 
includes the first, so the first includes the second. 

The reason they have separate names is that we distinguish them by their 
dominance: in the first Mitzva, it is AVI, GAR de Bina, Bina herself along with her 
property. Hence, it is called “fear.” However, in the second Mitzva it is Hochma 
that is dominant; hence, it is called “love.” 

Therefore, the words of the Torah, IN THE BEGINNING THE CREATOR 
CREATED constitute concealment, and the revelation of these words begins 



The Second Commandment 


391 


with the words LET THERE BE LIGHT, designating the ascent of Bina 
(BEGINNING) to Rosh de AA, where Bina becomes like Hochma. 

The combination of Hochma and Bina is then called GREAT LOVE. This 
is the meaning of the words, LET THERE BE LIGHT, for Bina ascends to AA 
and passes the Light to all the lower worlds with GREAT LOVE, i.e., by means 
of two Lights: Hassadim and Hochma. 

This is why it is said that the CREATOR’S LOVE IS CLARIFIED FROM 
TWO SIDES, as it is written: LET THERE BE LIGHT IN THIS WORLD AND 
IN THE WORLD TO COME. Because the Creator saw that this world cannot 
receive the Light, He concealed His Light and raised it above Parsa de AA, called 
(according to its corrected properties) “the world to come,” above Chazeh de AA, 
where AVI or GAR de Bina reside. 

Parsa is located below Chazeh de AA, and it separates the Supernal Waters 
(AVI) from the lower waters ( YESHSUT + ZON ). Since O hr Hochma does not 
shine below Chazeh de AA, it is said that the Light is concealed from Partzufim 
YESHSUT and ZON. 

Thus, we see that Bina is divided into two parts: GAR de Bina (AVI), located 
above the Chazeh (Parsa de AA or the Supernal Waters), upon whom the Upper 
Light shines, meaning that secrets are revealed within them. He who ascends to 
this degree receives its Light, thereby meriting “wealth (Hochma) and longevity 
(Hassadim). His sons (his future corrections) are like olive sprouts (olive oil 
symbolizes Hochma), they gather round his table (Hassadim), and he rules over 
his enemies (impure forces), and whatever his wish may be, he succeeds in it 
(for O hr Hochma is clothed in Ohr Hassadim).” ZAT de Bina are the lower waters, 
located below Chazeh de AA. The Light is concealed from them, and those who 
receive from them must love the Creator with the kind of love called “even it He 
takes away his soul.” 

These are the two degrees of love for the Creator. That is to say, love for 
the Creator is not the desire and decision of man alone. Rather, like any of our 
other desires, it appears only by attaining a particular degree: if one attains the 
degree of YESHSUT, it allows him to love the Creator “even it He takes away 
his soul.” However, an even more perfect love emerges within him who reaches 
the degree of AVI: he receives such Light from it that his love for the Creator 
becomes perfect on both sides. 

Yet, fear must be included in both kinds of love. For at the degree of AVI, 
one needs fear so as to not sin while in a state of spiritual ascent in AVI. And 
while at the degree of YESHSUT, one must fear lest his heart be hardened, 



392 


The Zohar 


for Hochma and Bina correspond to love and fear in a state of eternal unity. 
Therefore, one must include the properties of Bina (fear) into GAR de Bina 
(AVI), as well as into ZAT de Bina (YESHSUT). 

Only then will love be perfect on both sides, in both forms: GAR and ZAT 
de Bina. Love cannot possibly be perfect only on one side, but only if fear exists 
on both sides, for Hochma (love) cannot exist without Bina (fear). 

It follows that conditional love is the degree of AVI, whereas unconditional 
(perfect) love is the degree of YESHSUT. Yet, YESHSUT is below AVI. The thing 
is that man first receives Higher Sefirot of his emerging Partzuf, in the order 
KHB-ZA-M, but the Light enters them in the reverse order of NRNHY: first, he 
receives the Sefira Keter with the Light of Nefesh, and in the end he receives the 
Sefira Malchut, though the Light of Yechida enters Keter. Therefore, if we measure 
according to the Sefirot (Kelim), the degree of AVI = GE = KH (conditional love) 
is smaller than the degree of YESHSUT = AHP = B-ZA-M (unconditional love). 



The Third Commandment 


204. The third is to know that there is an Almighty Lord who governs 

the world, to unite this every day in the six Supernal limbs: HQT NHY of 
Zeir A npin, and to unify them in the six words of the prayer “Hear O Israel,” 
and with it to direct our desires upwards. Therefore, we must prolong the 
word “one” in the six words: “Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our Creator, the 
Lord is one.” 

In correspondence with the instruction to prolong the word “one,” he who 
utters this verse should pronounce this word lengthily, as ooone. However, The 
Zohar obviously alludes not to a simple utterance of one’s mouth, but rather to 
our true heartfelt intentions. 

What is indicated here is that one needs to know and make a union. First, 
one must know the two sides of love, AVI and YESHSUT. AVI are called the 
“big and great ones in Hassadim,” whereas YESHSUT is called “the Master of the 
World,” for it contains judgment and restriction. 

After man has attained both degrees of love and merited perfect love, he 
needs to know that there is a great Master who governs the entire world, and 
to unite this knowledge every day by using the six Supernal limbs, sides, that is, 
to raise MAN to ZON de Atzilut, and ZON will raise their MAN to YESHSUT. 
As a result, ZON and YESHSUT will ascend and unite with Partzuf AVI. This 
common Partzuf has six Supernal sides-limbs, for they all clothe VAK, the six 
lower Sefirot of AA. 

Because of this unity, YESHSUT ascends above Parsa de AA, to the place 
from the Peh down to the Chazeh, the place of the Supernal Waters. This is the 
permanent place of AVI, and the place where Light is revealed. When YESHSUT 
is filled with this Light, it passes it to ZON, which pass it on to the lower worlds, 
leading to the revelation of Ohr Hassadim in all the worlds. This is the secret of 
the union of “Hear, O Israel.” 


393 



394 


The Zohar 


The six words: “Hear, O Israel, die Lord is our Creator, the Lord is One” 
constitute the six sides of ZON, which need to be united so as to unite them 
with the six Supernal sides, that is, AVI and YESHSUT. And man must direct 
his intentions and NRN upwards, so they, too, would unite with Supernal unity, 
just as MAN. 

To achieve unity in VAK de ZA, in its six sides, the word “one” must be 
prolonged, meaning to receive Ohr Hochma within it, for Ohr Hochma descends 
from Ein Sof (infinity) to Supernal VAK, i.e., to AVI and YESHSUT, and unites 
VAK de ZA with the Light of Ein Sof. This is because the Gematria (numerical 
value) of the Hebrew word E chad (one) is Aleph + Chet + Dalet = 1 + 8 + 4 = 13, 
which indicates reception of Ohr Hochma. 

Hence, while pronouncing the word “one,” one should intend to draw 
Ohr Hochma to VAK de ZA. However, this unity lacks the intention to receive 
the Light of GAR in ZA, but only to enlarge its VAK through unity with the 
Supernal VAK, and to receive VAK de Gadlut. 

205. It is therefore written, “Let the waters under the Heavens be gathered 
together onto one place.” This means that all the degrees under the Heavens 
will gather onto one place, to become perfect in the six ends. Therewith, fear 
must be attached to the unity of the words: “Hear, O Israel,” which is done by 
prolonging the pronunciation of the letter Dalet in the word Echad. This is 
why the letter Dalet in the word Echad is written larger than the other letters. 
It is written, “Let the dry land appear,” to let the letter Dalet (designating dry 
land) be attached to that unity. 

As was already explained, the unity contained in the words “Hear, O Israel” 
refers to the reception of Gadlut by VAK. This is because “one place” signifies 
the Supernal VAK, where the Light of Ein Sof shines within Ohr Hochma, under 
the Heavens ( Bina ), with regard to the earth (ZA). The words “onto one place” 
imply the unification of all the six Upper and lower sides, so the lower Partzufim 
will receive Ohr Hochma and unite with VAK de ZA, but only as VAK de Gadlut. 

As we have already clarified, there are two kinds of fear and two kinds of 
love: the Upper fear and love are called AVI, whereas the lower fear and love are 
called YESHSUT. However, perfection is attained only by attaining both degrees 
together. Hence, the Light is concealed in YESHSUT, so the lower kind of love 
(“even if He takes away the soul”) will be revealed. But even in this case, fear 
must cling to love and prevent the hardening of the heart; only then does one 
reveal perfect love, merges with AVI and YESHSUT, and receives the complete 
Creator’s goodness. 



The Third Commandment 


395 


In the unity of “Hear, O Israel,” and after ZON ascend and unite with their 
properties in the six Upper sides to receive within them the “Great Love” in the 
word “one,” they receive the Light that was made on the first day of creation, of 
which it is written: “And the Creator said, ‘Let there be Light’” (Beresheet, 1:3). 

And to all of this unity one must attach fear, since he needs to reveal and 
receive the Light that is deliberately concealed in YESHSUT, so as to unite the 
lower love and fear, for they still cannot be considered perfect. 

Therefore, it is said that one should prolong the pronunciation of the Dalet 
in the word Echad (one) when reciting the prayer, Shema Israel, Adonay Eloheinu, 
Adonay EchaD-D-D! (Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our Creator, the Lord is One). 
In this case, the letter Dalet is written in large font. This is because big letters 
refer to Tvuna, and the big Dalet in the word Echad indicates that its place is in 
Tvuna, and that the Light is concealed there. By attracting it, not by utterance, 
of course, but by the spiritual action, man unites its concealment with the lower 
fear and love. 

AND THE DRY LAND APPEARED means that there is no perfection 
in the Upper fear and love, expressed in the six words of the prayer “Hear, 
O Israel” with the help of the word “one.” These words correspond to “Let 
there be Light,” until the unity of fear and love is achieved below. This unity is 
revealed in the Light that is concealed in Tvuna, designated by the letter Dalet 
(D) in the word Echad. 

Therefore, after the WATERS GATHERED TOGETHER ONTO ONE 
PLACE, signifying the descent of O hr Hochma into the six parts of ZA, DRY 
LAND APPEARED. It denotes the letter Dalet in the word Echad, which should 
be pronounced with (spiritual) prolongation, with the aim to turn it into land 
through the concealment of the Light. 

All of this is essential in order to unite the D, Tvuna, with AVI, resulting in 
the descent of the Light to VAK de ZON, so that love could be made perfect. 

206. After Malchut unites with ZA Above (in VAK de ZON), they must 
now be united below, in the masses, i.e., in all six sides of Malchut, in 
the words, BARUCH SHEM KVOD MALCHUTO LEOLAM VAED 
(Blessed be the great name of His kingdom for ever and ever), which contain 
six other words of unity. And then, what was dry land will become fertile 
soil, yielding fruit and plant. 

After the Supernal union is achieved, when the letter Dalet in the word 
Echad becomes whole Above, in AVI, it is essential to unite the Dalet in the 
word Echad below, in VAK, in the six aspects of Nukva de ZA (Rachel), who 



396 


The Zohar 


stands from Chazeh de ZA and below. All 600,000 souls of Israel, called “the 
inhabitants of Nukva,” are included in Rachel. 

After ZA unites in the Light of AVI, and the concealment of T vuna (in the 
words DRY LAND APPEARED or in the letter Dalet) is revealed in him, Nukva 
must be filled with these two revelations. This is designated by the six words, 
BARUCH SHEM KVOD MALCHUTO LEOLAM VAED, corresponding to the 
six Sefirot HGT NHY of Nukva. 

It was already explained that the Light was concealed in order to reveal 
both sides of love—good and evil. Yet, neither side of love, good or evil, can 
be revealed through concealment, but only through revelation of judgment. 
Before judgment was revealed, the letter Dalet in the word E chad was DRY 
LAND—utterly useless. This is because it emerged from the Light due to the 
concealment. Even fear to unite in the lower fear and love, which supplement 
the Upper fear and love was absent from it, for the judgment that reveals the 
lower fear and love was not yet revealed. 

Strictness and judgment are located in the legs of Partzuf Leah, which are 
included in the Rosh of Partzuf Rachel. ZA has two Nukvaot (plural for Nukva): 
Leah (above his Chazeh) and Rachel (below his Chazeh). Leah’s legs end at the 
Chazeh de ZA and touch Rachel’s Rosh. 


World of Atzilut 



Our World 


Parsa 

Machsom 











The Third Commandment 


397 


Since strictness and judgment are located at the end of the legs of Partzuf 
Leah, this affects only Partzuf Rachel, as each spiritual property acts only from 
the place of its manifestation and below. Therefore, the concealment in the 
lower love and fear manifests only in the place in Rachel where the force of 
strictness and judgment is manifested. 

Prior to the revelation of judgment, the letter Dalet in the word E chad was 
dry land, a place that is unfit for living. Now, however, after the descent of Partzuf 
Rachel into VAK, below Chazeh de ZA, the dry land became fertile, suitable for 
settlement and cultivation of fruits. In other words, the lower love and fear 
were revealed in it in completion and perfection. And they complement the 
Upper love and fear, so that all are perfect on both sides, for that is when all the 
goodness is revealed in AVI. 

It is therefore said, THE CREATOR CALLED THE DRY LAND EARTH- 
ERETZ (the word Eretz is derived from Ratzon— desire), for it is the property of 
the letter Dalet in the word E chad in the six Sefirot (sides) of Nukva de ZA (where 
the property of strictness and judgment is already revealed). The letter Dalet that 
was in DRY LAND and made its property inanimate and unfit to live on turns 
into EARTH in Nukva de ZA (as a result of a Z ivug with ZA), can now be settled 
and cultivated; hence, the Creator called it “earth.” 

207. It is written, AND THE CREATOR CALLED THE DRY LAND EARTH. 
This refers to the same unity below, by the words, BLESSED BE HIS GREAT 
NAME FOR EVER AND EVER, when the earth, called “desire,” became 
what it should be. For the word “earth” (Eretz) means desire (Ratzon). Hence, 
the expression IT WAS GOOD appears twice on the third day of creation: 
once for the Upper unity and once for the lower. For M alchut merges with 
both sides of ZA—with VAK de ZA and with her own VAK. Henceforth, the 
earth brings forth grass, for it has been corrected to yield fruit. 

The Upper unity (described by the words, WATERS GATHERED 
TOGETHER ONTO ONE PLACE) passes the Light that was created on the 
first day of creation from Above downwards, from the six Upper sides of AVI 
to VAK de ZA. This is called by the first word, IT WAS GOOD, uttered by the 
Creator on the third day of creation. 

And then occurs the lower unity, designated by the verse, BLESSED BE HIS 
GREAT NAME FOR EVER AND EVER. This means that the letter Dalet in 
the word E chad attains perfection only from the six sides of Nukva, as described 
by the verses, AND THE CREATOR CALLED THE DRY LAND EARTH and 



398 


The Zohar 


THE EARTH SHALL BRING FORTH GRASS, for in VAK de Nukva, DRY 
LAND turned to EARTH, yielding fruits. 

With regard to this unity of VAK de Nukva, the Creator said, IT WAS 
GOOD, for the second time on the third day of creation. It follows that when 
IT WAS GOOD is said for the first time, it refers to the Upper unity. And the 
second time refers to the lower. Because of the lower unity, both sides of love 
achieve perfection, and the Light of AVI descends to VAK de Nukva, and bears 
fruit for the 600,000 souls of Israel that inhabit her. 



The Fourth Commandment 


208. The fourth is to know that HaVaYaH (the Creator) is Elokim 

(Lord), as it is written: KNOW THIS DAY AND LAY IT IN YOUR HEART 
THAT HaVaYaH-CREATOR IS ELOKIM-LORD. That is, the name 
Elokim is included in the name of the HaVaYaH, and there is no distinction 
between them. 

HaVaYaH is ZA, and Elokim is Nukva de ZA. It is essential to unite ZA with 
Nukva by making their properties similar, so there is no distinction between 
them. Thus, the name Elokim of Nukva will be included in the name HaVaYaH 
of ZA, so that Nukva herself will become as HaVaYaH. 

This union signifies the reception of O hr Hochma (GAR) in ZON, for the 
union implied by the words HEAR, O ISRAEL is the reception of the Light of 
VAK from AVI in ZON. The unity in question here is the reception from AVI in 
ZON of the Light of GAR (Hochma). One can never receive an entire degree in 
one go: first VAK is received, and only then GAR. 

209. Hence, it is written, “Let the stars in Heaven shine upon the earth.” 
This means that both names, HaVaYaH and ELOKIM, are as one. This way, 
Malchut (Elokim) should merge with the name HaVaYaH (ZA). The black Light 
(Malchut) with the white Light (ZA), as one, without distinction. The white 
cloud by day (ZA) with the pillar of fire by night (Malchut); the property of day 
(ZA) merged with the property of night (Malchut), so they shine as one star. 

Nukva is called “a small star.” Initially, there were two stars, ZA and Malchut, 
and both were the same size. But the moon ( Malchut) complained that two stars 
cannot use one crown (source of Light). The Creator reply to Malchut was, “Go 
and diminish yourself’ (Talmud, Hulin, 60:2). 

As a result, the nine lower Sefirot of Malchut descended below the Parsa to 
the world of Beria, and only one Sefira, Keter de Malchut, remained in the world 


399 



400 


The Zohar 


of Atzilut. The task of the righteous is to elevate the nine lower Sefirot of Malchut 
from the world of Beria to the level of ZA, to correct her distinction from ZA, 
i.e., to grow and make her equal to ZA once more, so she will make a Zivug with 
ZA face to face. Thus, they shall correct the detachment of Malchut from ZA that 
was born of the moon’s complaint. 

The moon complained because it was unable to receive the Light directly 
from Ima, but only via ZA. Hence, the Creator gave it His advice: diminish 
yourself to a point (the Sefira Keter) and lower the nine Sefirot from Hochma to 
Malchut below the Parsa. Then, through the unity of “Hear, O Israel,” rebuild 
Malchut in VAK, in the lower unity of “Blessed be His great name for ever and 
ever,” for the power of judgment within it corrects the letter Dalet in the word 
E chad, turning the DRY LAND into the fruit-yielding EARTH. 

Therefore, the now black point of Malchut that caused its fall became as 
important as Light, for it is precisely the strictness of judgment that builds the 
letter Dalet in the word Echad and makes it fruit-bearing. And if Malchut had not 
had this power of judgment, the letter Dalet in the word E chad (T buna) would 
have remained DRY LAND. Hence, when the Light spreads inside her, the 
power of judgment and restriction becomes more important than Light itself, 
for it becomes the cause, the source of the Light of VAK, Ohr Hassadim. 

Thus, it is now possible to receive Ohr Hochma in VAK de Malchut, while 
elevating ZON to AVI. For now, just like ZA, Nukva can unite with AVI in her 
properties. This was the basis of her previous complaint, for the Light-restricting 
power within her turned into the cause of the Light’s diffusion. Hence, ZA and 
Malchut are considered a single whole: each of them constitutes the source of 
Light for the other, whereas previously, Malchut was completely dependent on 
ZA, and therefore felt humiliated. 

As a result of the union between ZA and Nukva in AVI, ZA connects to Aba, 
and Nukva to Ima. ZA turns into white clouds in the daylight and Nukva turns 
into a pillar of fire in the Light of night, i.e., the properties of day and night 
merge into one property, as it is written: AND THERE WAS EVENING AND 
THERE WAS MORNING, ONE DAY. Together they illuminate the earth and 
those who inhabit Nukva in the worlds of BYA. 

210. This is the sin of the primeval serpent that unites below but separates 
Above; hence, it caused what it caused to the world. What should be united 
Above, should be separated below. The black light, which is Malchut, 
should be united Above with ZA into a single whole and then separate it 
from the “evil side.” 



The Fourth Commandment 


401 


The union and fulfillment of ZON with Ohr Hochma occurs only when 
they ascend to AVI, above Chazel i de AA, where ZA merges with Aba and Nukva 
merges with Ima. As a result, they unite, and ZA passes Ohr Hochma to Malchut. 
However, in the permanent place of ZON, below Chazeh de AA, they cannot 
form a union and allow Nukva to receive Ohr Hochma. 

This is exactly what provoked Adam’s sin and allowed the Serpent to bring 
death into the world (cause the disappearance of Ohr Hochma from Malchut), by 
compelling Adam and Chava (Eve) to make a Z ivug (union) in the permanent 
place of ZON, below Chazeh de AA. As a result, the Upper Z ivug stopped in AVI, 
as ZA started passing Ohr Hochma from AVI down to Malchut. 

Thus, all the parts (souls) of Malchut existing in the world stopped receiving 
Ohr Hochma from AVI. This is regarded as death, for as soon as the impure forces 
approach ZON to draw their Ohr Hochma, AVI immediately terminate their Z ivug 
for the sake of ZON, to prevent the impure force from clinging to ZON. And as 
soon as Ohr Hochma departs from ZON, the impure force leaves them at once, 
for it approaches ZON with the sole purpose of feeding on Ohr Hochma. 

However, after being in Ima and receiving Ohr Hochma, Malchut descends to 
her permanent place and passes this Light to the souls of the righteous, called 
the “inhabitants of Malchut.” She unites with them via equivalence of their 
properties, for in the absence of unity with ZA below, Malchut draws far from 
the evil side and the impure forces cannot receive from her. 

211. Nevertheless, one should know that Elokim and HaVaYaH are one, 
without distinction. HaVaYaH is Elokim. If man knows that all is one and 
does not cause any separation, then even the opposite, impure forces disappear 
from the world, instead of descending below. 

Although there is fear that a Z ivug will occur in ZON in their place below, 
this is no cause to stop aspiring for a Z ivug Above, in AVI. Moreover, one must 
attain that HaVaYaH is Elokim, which is achieved by uniting ZA with Nukva. 
And if man raises his MAN, thereby causing ZON to ascend to AVI and unite 
there, the impure forces are completely rejected by the Light, weaken and finally 
disappear from the world. 

212. The secret behind the word Me’orot, which consists of the words 
Mavet (death) and Ohr (Light), is that the impure forces follow knowledge, 
understanding, and thought. And this is Light, which is the opposite from 
death—Mavet, for the Light (Ohr) is inside death—Mavet (spelled as Me’ot) in 



402 


The Zohar 


the word ME’ohrOT. This alludes to the fact that Light separates death, but 
when Light disappears, the letters unite and form the word “death.” 

The impure forces follow reason (knowledge, understanding, and thought). 
Reason signifies “Light,” and the impure force is “death,” where Light connects 
the letters, while death separates them. 

Here is the explanation of this: the power of restriction in Malchut is the 
source of the emergence of the impure forces. Because ZON united with AVI 
so as to receive the Light of VAK and GAR, the power of restriction in Malchut 
turned into Light by receiving the Light of VAK in the union below. Then, it 
ascended to AVI once more, and Malchut merged with ZA at the degree of AVI. 

This union Above is designated by the word Me’orot = Ohr + Mavet. As a 
result of the Light of VAK and GAR descending to Nukva in the union with ZA 
at the level of AVI, the power of restriction in Malchut turns into Light, and all 
the impure forces that were created by this restriction disappear, for their root 
turns to Light. Consequently, the letters of the word Mavet of the impure forces 
disappear, and the words Me’ohrot Ohr appear instead. 

213. Chava started with these letters, and brought evil into the world. As it 
is written, the woman SAW that it was good to bring the letters of the word 
M e’ohrot back. From there she took the letters Vav-Tav-Reish'Aleph, leaving 
only the letters Mem and Vav. And they took with them the letter Tav, thus 
forming the word Mem-Vav-Tav (Mavet—death). And they brought death 
into the world. 

Thanks to the unity of the letters in the word Me’ohrot, designating the 
reception of Ohr Hochma in ZON, in the unity of ZON Above, the received Light 
separates the letters of Mavet in AVI, for it shines within them and forms a new 
combination of the letters Me’ohrot. And if ZON make a union below, at their 
permanent place, the Light disappears from the combination of letters Me’ohrot, 
and the word Mavet (death) remains. 

AND THE WOMAN SAW THAT THE TREE WAS GOOD (Beresheet, 
3:6). The Hebrew equivalent for the words “and saw” is Vetir’e = Vav-Tav-Reish- 
Aleph. These are the letters that depart from the word Me’ohrot (stars), leaving 
only Mem-Vav. They attach the letter Tav (Nukva of the impure forces) and form 
the word Mavet—the name for Klipot. 

Chava drew these letters from the word Me’ohrot, meaning she followed the 
serpent’s advice to unite ZON at their place below. In doing so, she violated 
the holy union of the letters in the word Me’ohrot, for the union of ZON below 



The Fourth Commandment 


403 


immediately causes the separation of AVI and the word Me’ohrot into Ohr 
(Light) and Mavet (death). 

The impure forces, called “death,” contain a male part, called “Sam,” and a 
female part, called “Lilit.” The letter Mem is the male part of the word MaveT, 
called “Sam,” and the letter Tav is its female part, called “Lilit.” Thus, there was 
a Z ivug between the male and female parts, the letters Mem, Tav and Yesod ( Vav ), 
forming the word MaVeT, as the name of the impure force. 

This signifies the appearance of the serpent before Chava, and the 
transference of impurity from it to her. As she followed its advice, the letter Tav 
entered her, splitting the word O hr (Light) and combining the letters into the 
word Vetir’e (AND SAW). Then, the male part of the impure force ( Mem-Vav ) 
appeared and made a Z ivug with Tav, which was already present in Chava; thus, 
death ( MaVeT) appeared in the world. 

214. And look: said Rabbi Elazar: “My father, I have learned that after Chava 
had removed the letters VeTiR’E from the word Me’ohrot, the letters Mem 
and Vav did not remain. Only the letter Mem remained, for the letter Vav, 
which is the letter of life, turned into death. This occurred because it attached 
the letter Tav to itself, thus forming the word MaVeT.” He replied: “Blessed 
are you, my son!” 

Rabbi Elazar answered that the letter Mem remained alone, without the 
letter Vav, for Vav designates Yesod, whereas Sam (the male part of the impure 
forces) lacks Yesod; hence, it is written that it is unable to procreate offspring, 
akin to a castrated man. The letter Vav designates Yesod, the place of a Z ivug, the 
union of the male and female parts of ZON. The letter Vav always designates 
life, Yesod of the pure forces, whose Z ivug bears fruit, for it is made on the screen 
that stands in Yesod. 

Here, the pure letter Vav became impure and turned into Yesod of the impure 
force, MaVeT. After Vav received from Yesod of the pure forces, it united in a 
Z ivug with Tav, and the word MaVeT was formed. This was precisely the sin of 
Adam, which defiled the pure Vav. 




The Fifth Commandment 


215. The fifth Mitzva. It is written: LET THE WATERS SWARM WITH 
SWARMS OF LIVING CREATURES (Beresheet, 1:20). This verse contains 
three M itzvot. The first is to study the Torah, the second is to procreate and 
multiply, and the third is to remove the foreskin on the eighth day. And it is 
necessary to study the Torah on all the days, at all times, in order to correct 
one’s soul and spirit. 

The four previous Mitzvot originate in the first four days of creation, and are 
intended for the correction of the degrees H-B-ZA-M of the world of Atzilut. 

The First Mitzva originates from the word BERESHEET (Bina, fear of the 
Great and Mighty Creator, who rules over all), referring only to GAR de Bina 
that is located in AVI. The position of AVI is from Peh to Chazeh de AA, Yod of 
the name HaVaYaH. 

The Second originates from the words LET THERE BE LIGHT, 

and is meant for the correction of ZAT de Bina (called YESHSUT), located from 
Chazeh to Tabur de AA, i.e., below its Parsa. However, when it is said, LET THERE 
BE LIGHT, this means that YESHSUT ascended and united with AVI, forming 
one Partzuf above Chazeh de AA. And from there they ascended to Rosh de AA. 

Such a state (degree) is called “Great love,” designated by the first letter 
(Hey) of the name HaVaYaH: Yod-Hey-Vav-Hey, and the Light passes from it to 
ZON. However, ZON cannot receive O hr Hochma from AVI, for they are GAR de 
Bina and will always remain only with O hr Hassadim, unwilling to receive, hence 
their name, “fear.” 

ZON, however, receive Ohr Hochma from ZAT de Bina (YESHSUT), which 
ascended above Parsa de AA, called “Great love.” However, YESHSUT, which 
stand below Parsa de AA, cannot pass Ohr Hochma to ZA, for Ohr Hochma is 
concealed within them. Also, their Tvuna is called DRY LAND. 


405 



406 


The Zohar 


The Third M itzva originates from the two stars that were created on the 
third day of creation, of which it is written: LET THE WATERS UNDER THE 
HEAVENS BE GATHERED TOGETHER ONTO ONE PLACE, AND LET 
THE DRY LAND APPEAR... and LET THE EARTH BRING FORTH GRASS. 
This Mitzva is intended for the correction of VAK de ZON, whose union Above 
stems from the verse, LET THE WATERS, referring to ZA, whereas the union 
below stems from the verse, LET THE EARTH PUT FORTH GRASS, and 
refers to VAK de Nukva. 

The Fourth Mitzva originates from the verse, LET THE STARS, and is 
meant for the correction of GAR in ZA and Malchut. Thus, all the corrections 
necessary for AVI, YESHSUT and ZON de Atzilut have already taken place in the 
first four days of creation. ZON received GAR (O hr Hochma), and, being of equal 
height, can now make a Z ivug face to face. Therefore, the rest of the Mitzvot are 
intended for this Zivug of ZON. 

The Fifth Mitzva is LET THE WATERS SWARM WITH SWARMS OF 
LIVING CREATURES. Now there is a need to bring ZON to a perfect face-to- 
face Z ivug, i.e., (i) to receive O hr Neshama onto this Z ivug, so that Adam, too, 
will receive this Light and make a holy and pure Z ivug, which is attained by 
man’s efforts in the study of the Torah; (ii) to give birth to holy souls; and (iii) 
to correct the holy covenant by circumcision and rejection. 

Man’s efforts lie in that he studies the Torah, although he realizes that he 
does not attain it (receives nothing in his corrected desires, called Guf, body). He 
merely utters its words with his “mouth” (not yet able to receive the Light (Torah) 
in his body for the Creator’s sake), but as a result, he attains Ohr Nefesh. 

Man’s efforts should correspond to his readiness to do everything in his 
power to attain and understand the Torah, which causes him to attain Ohr 
Ruach. However, he must not limit himself to such attainments, but rather 
multiply his efforts so as to attain Ohr Neshama. Thus, every day he must aspire 
to correct his Nefesh and Ruach, and by increasing them, attain Neshama. 

216. Because man labors in the study of the Torah, he corrects the other holy 
soul, as it is written, SWARMS OF LIVING CREATURES, referring to the 
life-giving holy soul, Malchut. For when man does not study the Torah, he 
lacks the holy soul and the holiness that descends from Above. Yet, when he 
does study the Torah, he merits its Light, just like holy angels. 

Nukva de ZA that makes a face-to-face Z ivug with ZA in the state of Gadlut is 
called “living,” for ZA is then called the “Tree of Life.” Consequently, Nukva is 
called “Life.” By raising MAN during the study of Torah for the Creator’s sake, 



The Fifth Commandment 


407 


man causes ZON to make a Zivug and receives O hr Nefesh from it. And if he does 
not study the Torah for the Creator’s sake, he cannot even attain O hr Nefesh, for 
he fails to bring about the Creator’s Zivug with the Shechina. And a Zivug can be 
attained only by raising MAN. 

It is therefore written: LET THE WATERS SWARM WITH SWARMS OF 
LIVING CREATURES, for the Torah is called “water.” If man raises MAN with 
the help of the Torah, he merits O hr Nefesh (holy spirit) from Ohr Haya (Life). 
Moreover, he merges with the Creator only after he attains Nefesh, Ruach, and 
Neshama from HAYA (Supernal holy life). He unites Ohr Nefesh with Ohr Ruach, 
Ohr Ruach with Ohr Neshama, and Ohr Neshama with the Creator. 

217. It is written, “Angels of the Creator shall bless Him.” This refers to those 
who study the Torah, as they are called His angels on earth. It is also written, 
BIRDS SOARING OVER THE EARTH. This refers to this world. However, 
in the world to come, as it is said, the Creator will make them wings like those 
of an eagle so they may soar in the whole world. 

Why does The Zohar mention angels? Because angels are spiritual forces— 
mechanical enactors of the Creator’s will. They were repeatedly compared to 
animals in our world (e.g., a horse) that fulfill man’s will. Angels are spiritual 
forces without freedom or egoism; hence, they never sin and have no need for 
the Torah, which is why they are spiritually inanimate, motionless—they do not 
grow spiritually. 

Man is created in such a way that before he carries out any task, he needs to 
realize what he is supposed to do. But angels carry out their assignments even 
before they hear and understand what the Creator wants from them, for His 
desire rules over them. Hence, nothing prevents them from instant fulfillment 
of His will. They always follow the Creator, just like man’s shadow follows him. 
This is why they are believed to act before they even hear. 

Man can therefore act like an angel (even though his desires are of egoistic 
nature) if his desires become like those of angels, whose actions precede their 
understanding (hearing). Just like an angel, such a person fulfills all the Creator’s 
desires before he realizes, hears and understands them, for he follows the Creator 
as a shadow follows man. 

This can be illustrated by the following example: when a strong wind throws 
dust in one’s eyes, he quickly shuts them, even before his brain and thoughts 
feel and realize the need to do so: the action (shutting the eyes) precedes the 
actual realization of the thought of dust. 



408 


The Zohar 


Although the physical body of such a person exists together with us in this 
world, his spiritual body (desires) becomes angel-like, and his actions precede 
his hearing. He does not need to hear in order to fulfill the Creator’s will, but 
observes any Mitzva even before his brain realizes what he is doing. Therefore, 
he is regarded as an angel. 

Hence, The Zohar says that in the future the Creator will provide him with 
wings to enable him to soar over the whole world. For until man attains the holy 
soul (Ohr Nefesh —the smallest spiritual Light), the impure force rules over him, 
as the prophet said: “The souls of your enemies, them shall he sling out, as from 
the hollow of a sling” (Shmuel I, 25:29). 

Hence, one cannot merge with the Creator and observe His desires (Mittrot) 
until he has acquired faith in the Creator’s names and knows that He is absolutely 
good to all and bestows only goodness. And if one has not yet attained the holy 
soul, and the impure force still rules over him, when his thoughts soar above 
the world, it seems to him as though the Creator’s rule is not quite as good as it 
should be according to His names. This feeling of his brings corruption to the 
Creator’s holy names, and he cannot find a quiet place for himself, cannot have 
faith in His names and draw closer to Him. 

Therefore, he stains himself with such impurity that it leads him toward 
lack of faith in the Creator and in His names. However, nothing of this affects 
the spiritual; it occurs simply because man has not yet attained the spiritual 
realm, and is making no effort to do so. 

But as soon as he receives the holy soul (O hr Nefesh), his body (desires and 
thoughts) instantly becomes angel-like: his actions precede realization. It is written 
about such a person: “And the birds shall soar above the earth,” for in the future, 
the Creator will give him wings, and he will soar above the whole world. 

For he soars mentally above the whole world and sees how the Creator 
governs all. Yet, not only does he not err when seeing the manifestation of this 
governance, he receives the strength to raise MAN to increase his spiritual anti- 
egoistic powers. By looking upon all the forms of the Creator’s rule over this 
world and, seeing the harshness of the external manifestations of this rule, such 
a person is given an opportunity to ask for the strengthening of his faith. And 
owing to his faith in the Creator’s unity and absolute kindness of His rule, he 
raises MAN and receives increasingly greater Light for the Creator’s sake. 

218. It is written in this regard: LET BIRDS SOAR OVER THE EARTH, 
for the Torah, called THE WATERS, will SWARM WITH SWARMS OF 
LIVING CREATURES from its place of life, M alchut, and all will descend 



The Fifth Commandment 


409 


down below. This is what King David referred to, when he said, THE 
CREATOR CREATED IN ME A PURE HEART to study The Torah, and 
A HOLY SPIRIT WAS RENEWED WITHIN ME. 

So as to continue to explain the aforementioned text, The Zohar compares 
the Torah to water—just as living creatures emerged from water, in the same 
way the Light of life descends from Malchut (called “life”) upon the entire 
world. This is the Light for which King David asked the Creator. He begged 
for a pure heart in order to study the Torah and raise MAN, for this would 
lead him to the reception of the holy spirit of renewal—the strength to merge 
with the Creator even more. 




The Sixth Commandment 


219. The sixth M itzva is to procreate and multiply, for he who does so turns 
the stream, called Yesod de ZA, into an inexhaustible fountain. And the sea, 
M alchut, shall be filled from all directions, and new souls shall come forth 
from that tree, and a multitude of forces shall appear together with those 
souls, to guard them. Hence, it is written: LET THE WATERS SWARM 
WITH SWARMS OF LIVING CREATURES. This is the mark of the holy 
Covenant. The stream grows stronger, turns into a river, and thus brings more 
and more new souls to life. 

An awakening from below causes an awakening from Above: raising MAN, 
the prayers and requests of the lower ones to receive strength so they can perform 
spiritual, altruistic actions, stimulate a Zivug Above between the Creator and the 
Shechina. As a result, the stream, Yesod de ZA, fills with water and descends to 
Nukva de ZA, filling her on all sides, wishing to both revive all the worlds (to 
bestow O hr Hassadim) and bear new souls (pass Ohr Hochma downward, for birth 
is possible only in O hr Hochma). 

There are two kinds of Zivugim de ZON: (i) a “Zivug of existence” on Ohr 
Hassadim, from which Ohr Hassadim descends to provide the lower souls with 
what they need for their existence. This Zivug on Ohr Hassadim also gives birth 
to angels, (ii) A “Zivug of birth” on Ohr Hochma, which leads to the creation of 
new Partzufim, new human souls. 

These new souls emerge from the Tree (ZA). However, although they are 
called new, the genuinely new souls originate in the world of Ein So/ (Infinity), 
whereas these souls were already within Adam, and fell into the impure forces 
as a result of his sin. Now they are revived with the help of the Tree of Life (ZA); 
hence, they are called “new souls.” A multitude of other forces, called Heavenly 


411 



412 


The Zohar 


hosts or armies, descends along with them. But completely new souls descend to 
the world only after the correction of Adam’s sin has been completed. 

Yesod de ZA is called a “covenant,” because we (Malchut, souls) feel and 
receive from it all the Light of our life. It constitutes the source of our life, 
descending to us from the Tree of Life (ZA). ZA ascends to AVI (called “garden”) 
in order to take the waters from them and fill Malchut, his Nukva. A Z ivug on 
VAK (Hassadim) is called WATERS SWARM, and a Z ivug on GAR (Hochma ) is 
called LIVING CREATURES. 

220. A number of birds (angels) that soar above the whole world enter 
Malchut along with those souls. When a soul comes into this world, the bird 
that came from that tree along with that soul accompanies it. How many 
angels leave with each soul? Two: one on the right, and one on the left. If 
one so merits, they guard him, as it is written: FOR HE WILL GIVE HIS 
ANGELS CHARGE OVER YOU. Yet, if he does not merit, they report and 
accuse him. Rabbi Pinchas said: “There are three angels that guard man, 
if he so merits, as it is written, IF THERE BE AN ANGEL OVER HIM, 
A DEFENDER, ONE AMONG A THOUSAND THAT WARNS MAN. If 
there be an ANGEL—is the first; A DEFENDER—is the second; one among a 
thousand THAT WARNS man—is the third.” 

221. Rabbi Shimon said: “In all, there are five angels, for the verse continues: 
‘there is one after the giver and two more, so in all there are five.’” He replied: 
“This is not so. ‘The giver’ refers solely to the Creator Himself, and not to an 
angel, for only the Creator is permitted to give, but no one else.” 

A number of angels come forth together with the begotten souls. These 
angels are called “soaring” or “flying.” They help the souls to sentence to the 
scale of merit, or, conversely, complain to the Creator about these souls, and 
push them toward the scale of sin, which entails punishments. These angels soar 
above the world, see how the Creator rules over all, and report all this to the 
soul. If the soul so merits, it sentences itself and the entire world to the scale of 
merit; if not, it sentences itself and the entire world to the scale of sin. 

Therefore, Rabbi Pinchas does not dispute Rabbi Shimon when he says 
that only two angels are bom with a soul. Rather, he says that as long as there 
are only two angels in man, he cannot sentence to the scale of merit completely, 
and keeps moving between the scales of sin (punishment) and merit (reward). 
However, through one’s good deeds, the third angel is born within him, which 
enables man to sentence everything to the scale of merit. Hence, only with the 
help of the three angels can he achieve his correction. 



The Sixth Commandment 


413 


222. And he who abstains from procreating and multiplying belittles (so to 
speak) the form that includes all other forms, the form of man, causes that 
stream, Yesod of ZA, to dry out, and harms the holy Covenant (Yesod of 
ZA) from all sides. It is written of such a man, “Go forth and look upon 
the corpses of those that have transgressed against the Creator.” Of course, 
those who transgress against Me. This is said about the body, as the soul never 
even enters the screen, i.e., the Creator’s domain. And such a man shall be 
banished from the world. 

Malchut is called a “form,” a “property” that contains all of the other 
properties, for all the forms of NRN of the righteous and of the angels in the 
three worlds of BYA originate from her. They constitute all the hosts and armies. 
And those that do not procreate and multiply thereby diminish the form of 
Malchut and prevent her from using all of her hosts and armies. For with the 
help of MAN that the lower ones raise, the Light descends from Above and 
stimulates a Z ivug between the Creator and the Shechina. This Z ivug creates 
NRN— the souls of the righteous and the angels in the worlds of BYA. 

And those that impede this Z ivug cause the stream (Yesod of ZA) to dry out 
and stop the flow of its male waters into the holy Shechina, Malchut. In doing so, 
they harm the holy covenant in all of its properties, for they delay the two parts 
of the Z ivug: VAK (on Ohr Hassadim) and GAR (on O hr Hochma). 

This is because the Mitzva of procreation and multiplication constantly 
develops the soul. As a result, man defeats his body forever, so it can rise again 
during the resurrection from the dead. And he who abstains from procreating 
and multiplying turns his body into a corpse, of which it is written: GO FORTH 
AND LOOK UPON THE CORPSES OF THE PEOPLE, for his soul will not 
be able to enter the Creator’s domain and merge with Him. Thus, he is rejected 
from the world to come. 




The Seventh Commandment 


223. The seventh M itzva is to perform circumcision on the eighth day, and thus 
remove the impurity of the foreskin, for M alchut constitutes the eighth degree 
of all the degrees, beginning with Bina. And the soul that soars from her must 
appear before her on the eighth day; hence, she constitutes the eighth degree. 

Nukva de ZA is called Haya if she rises and clothes Ima-Bina, the eighth 
degree from Malchut (provided that you count all ten Sefirot from below upwards). 
Malchut is hence called “the eighth,” for she ascended eight degrees, from her 
own place to that of Bina. And when she reaches Bina, she receives the name 
Haya, just like Bina. 

Therefore, man’s soul, which is born in Malchut (that ascended to Bina), 
must appear before Malchut in all the appropriate corrections of circumcision, 
removal of the foreskin and the rolling up of its remains, on the eighth day from 
its birth in Malchut. This is because then it becomes clear that it is a soul that 
was born from none other than the holy degree of Haya. 

Because of the force of circumcision and rolling up, man’s soul sloughs the 
impure force, and the soul can receive the perfection of O hr Haya. LET THE 
WATERS SWARM—thus Malchut receives the Supernal male waters from ZON, 
and is filled with them. 

224. It then becomes clear that the type of this soul is Haya. That is, belonging 
to that holy degree of Haya (Malchut), and not to any other degree. And this 
is implied by, LET THE WATERS SWARM, as is explained in the book of 
Hanoch, the waters of the holy seed merge in the properties of the soul of 
Haya. And it is the property of the letter Yod, marked on the sacred flesh, 
more than any other mark that exists in the world. 

Because of the circumcision, the Supernal male waters fill man’s soul the 
way they were received in Nukva (called “the soul of Haya”). The Upper World, 


415 



416 


The Zohar 


called Bina, is designated by the letter Yod, and the lower world, Malchut, is 
designated by the letter Hey— its property. However, as Malchut ascends to Bina, 
the letter Hey disappears from her, and, just like Bina, turns into Yod. 

Similarly, through man’s observance of the Mitzva of spiritual circumcision, 
the letter Hey disappears, and just like in the Nukva that ascended to Bina, the 
property of the letter Yod appears in him instead. And if man’s body acquires the 
property of Yod, he can receive the soul of Haya from Nukva. 

225. The verse, LET BIRDS SOAR OVER THE EARTH, refers to Eliyahu, 
who flies across the whole world in four flights in order to be present in the 
place, where the Holy Covenant is made. And a chair must be prepared for 
him, and it must be said out loud, THIS IS THE CHAIR OF ELIYAHU. For 
this is not done so, he will not appear in that place. 

Angels originate from AVI; hence, they remain exclusively in the sky and 
consist of HGT NHY. Therefore, when they appear in this world to fulfill their 
tasks, they are said to make six flights, for they clothe in six Sefirot. 

However, Eliyahu stems from Malchut (not from AVI). Hence, he is 
constantly connected to the earth. And since Malchut contains only four Sefirot 
of ZA, for her position is parallel to the Sefirot TNHY (Tifferet-Netzah-Hod-Yesod, 
pronounced, Tanhi) from Chazeh de ZA downward, it is written that Eliyahu 
flies on four flights, i.e., by clothing in Sefirot TNHY. 

Under no circumstances should one interpret the words about Eliyahu’s 
presence at every rite of circumcision literally. Yet, if he is obliged to be there, 
why should he be invited? 

The Zohar explains this in another place (Shlach, 18): there are four impure 
forces, called “Stormy Wind,” “Great Cloud,” “Blazing Flame,” and Noga. The 
lowest of them, Stormy Wind, is at the center, as though clothed by Great 
Cloud, which is in turn clothed by Blazing Flame. And they are all clothed from 
the outside by Noga. 

All the worlds, forces, and everything that was ever created exists within man. 
And these are our spiritual forces, by which we can attain the goal of creation. 
The first three impure forces are completely impure (egoistic). Whereas Noga is 
half good and half evil. But how is that possible if the spiritual is always true? 
How can it be half good (altruistic) and half evil (egoistic) at the same time? 

In fact, this is impossible. Noga is a neutral force that can be used by the 
pure force (then Noga is considered good) or by the impure force (and then it 
is considered evil). Hence, Noga is called “half good and half evil” although 



The Seventh Commandment 


417 


neutral in itself. It may be attached to either pure or impure forces, and this 
depends entirely on man. 


MAN’S SPIRITUAL FORCES 
Pure - altruistic 

Noga - neutral 

Blazing Flame - egoistic 
Great Cloud - egoistic 
Stormy Wind - egoistic 

These four impure forces are located at the end of each spiritual Partzuf, in 
its Sefira Yesod. The Sefira Yesod has two layers of skin, one atop of the other. One 
layer is called Orla, and contains the three impure forces. The other is called 
Preia, and this is Noga. 

The first man, Adam, was born circumcised, meaning that he did not 
have the three impure forces at all—he was completely unaware of his egoistic 
desires. In other words, they could not cling to him. Noga prevailed in him, 
in his sensations. Yet, since it was separated from the three impure forces and 
attached to the pure force (Adam’s altruistic desires), Noga itself was considered 
completely good. 

The three impure forces are collectively called the Serpent. These three 
impure desires were roused in Adam and tempted him to use them. In so doing, 
Adam attracted the Orla to himself, as it is described in the Talmud ( Sanhedrin, 
38:2). As soon as he attached Orla to himself, his pure soul (the Light of the 
world of Atzilut) immediately disappeared, for his desires became egoistic, and 
he fell with his properties (desires) to the world of Assiya, to its lowest degree, 
called “this world,” and was condemned to death (disappearance of the Supernal 
spiritual Light). 

Therefore, it is written about him that since he violated the prohibition of 
not eating the fruits of the Tree of Knowledge, he attached the Orla to himself. 
Consequently, the impure desires acquired both layers of skin on the Sefira 
Yesod of Partzuf Adam, and Preia, called Noga, became impure, too, because 
of its contact with the Orla, with the three impure forces. However, there is a 
distinction between them, which lies in the fact that prior to Adam’s sin, Preia 
was pure, and all of its impurity stems from its contact with the Orla. 

Accordingly, there are two types of correction: circumcision and rolling up 
of the remaining skin. The Orla must be cut off and cast in the dust, since only 
thus can man free himself from these egoistic desires. Preia, however, can be left 


418 


The Zohar 


attached to Yesod. But the skin around the Sefira Yesod must be rolled up. This 
is a special spiritual action that frees the Preia from the impure forces remaining 
in it. Hence, this action causes the Light to return to the Partzuf. This Light 
previously disappeared because of the egoistic desires that ruled in the Partzuf 
before the spiritual circumcision took place. 

However, this is still insufficient for the fulfillment of the spiritual Partzuf, 
Adam, with the Light, as it was before he sinned, i.e. used the Serpent’s impure 
forces and tasted the forbidden fruit from the Tree of Knowledge (received O hr 
Hochma in egoistic desires). For now, after Adam’s sin and fall, a special angel by 
the name of SAM makes accusations and complaints against man. 

To neutralize the power of SAM, Eliyahu took upon himself his role of a 
prosecutor, and was thereby granted an opportunity to defend Israel (one who 
aspires to the Creator) when he circumcises himself (his egoistic desires). 

Hence, it is said that Eliyahu must be present at each rite of circumcision 
(Hebrew, Brit Mila—the Covenant with the Creator). For since it is he, rather than 
SAM, who complains to the Creator about Israel’s neglect of their Covenant, he 
can also testify that when Israel aspires to the Creator, it is loyal to the covenant. 
As a result, the Light returns to the Partzuf. 

This is why, besides the chair occupied by the man who holds the baby 
(Sandak-godfather), one more chair must be prepared for the prophet Eliyahu. 
For the chair designates the beginning of correction, the influence of the Upper 
One on the lower one. The first chair, on which the Sandak sits, belongs to 
the Creator, for the filling of Light as the result of the circumcision and the 
rolling up of the impure forces. The second chair is saved for Eliyahu, so he can 
neutralize the impure forces’ complaints to the Creator against man, so they 
would not be able to accuse man. 

However, to make Eliyahu appear, one must say out loud: THIS IS THE 
CHAIR OF ELIYAHU. The thing is that a male baby is circumcised on the 
eighth day after Shabbat (Malchut with the Light of AVI, called “holy”) has passed 
over him. Since the sloughed desires (O rla) are cast away, the impure force sees 
that it is given a part of the Creator’s Covenant. Because of this gift, it stops 
complaining and accusing man. On the contrary, it begins to advocate him 
before the Creator. 

The spiritual desires (objects) pass their properties from one to another. 
Since the O rla was attached to Yesod, after the circumcision (separation from 
Yesod) it takes part of the pure desires with it. And since we throw it to the dust, 



The Seventh Commandment 


419 


to the impure forces, they draw from it that weak Light, which they can receive 
from the circumcision and the rolling up. 

This is why the impure forces stop complaining against Israel, and no longer 
wish to destroy this Light, for in so doing they will lose the part that they draw 
from it. Thus, they become defenders of the pure forces, to allow the pure forces 
to be filled with Light. 

Yet, Eliyahu cannot bear this correction, for although the Klipa stops 
impeding and slandering Israel, it takes part of the Light for itself in return. To 
correct this, Eliyahu takes upon himself all the accusations against Israel, and 
refuses to give anything from the pure to the impure forces. 

Thus, although the impure force stopped complaining against Israel, and 
actually became its defender, Eliyahu himself continues to accuse in order to 
wrest all the power from the impure forces and fully separate them from the 
pure. Hence, a chair must be prepared for Eliyahu, for it is he who fully separates 
the impure forces from the pure ones. 

One must therefore verbalize the words: THIS IS THE CHAIR OF 
ELIYAHU. For after the circumcision, part of the Light still remains in the 
impure forces, and the mention of Eliyahu completely deprives them of any 
contact with the Light. 

Thus, if man does not express his desire to detach himself completely from 
the impure forces, through his own effort (by the screen positioned in Peh ), it 
does not happen, even though the first chair belongs to the Creator. This is 
because the Creator starts the process of creation (makes His foundation in 
the form of a chair), and man continues and corrects his nature by performing 
altruistic deeds. 

226. And the Creator created great Leviathans. They were two: O rla and 
Preia, male and female forces, and all living creatures. This is the mark of 
the Holy Covenant, the soul of the holy Ohr Haya, as it is written, LET THE 
WATERS SWARM, the Supernal Waters that descend to this Covenant. 

Leviathan and his wife designate that which is opposite from O rla and Preia. 
They are also called Nachash (Serpent) and Alcaton (his wife). O rla is the Serpent, 
and Nachash is the male part that must be cut off and committed to dust. Preia 
is the correction, liberation from the Serpent’s female part, Alcaton. Through 
these corrections, Ohr Haya of AVI descends from Above. 

227. The reason why Israel below is marked in the holy form, similar to its 
form from Above, is to separate the pure part from the impure, to distinguish 



420 


The Zohar 


between the holiness of Israel and the other nations that originate from the 
other side. And just as Israel was marked, so were the animals and birds—to 
determine which of them belong to Israel, and which belong to the nations of 
the world. Happy is the lot of Israel! 

Man’s attitude toward all the living creatures in our world is similar to the 
attitude of the general spiritual creation, called “man,” toward his parts. This 
is because Adam includes absolutely everything within his spiritual body. And 
there is nothing except for this spiritual Partzuf, called “man” or “Adam.” 

All spiritual objects, angels, souls, both pure and impure forces are parts 
of Adam’s body. All that is described in Kabbalah speaks only of the spiritual 
world, of one creature called “man,” Adam. Adam’s various parts, his various 
desires—are called “Israel,” “nations of the world,” “pure animals,” “impure 
animals,” and so forth. 

All that man must do in our world (for every one of us was created in the 
image of Adam, recreating Adam’s entire Partzuf within him) is build a pure, 
altruistic Partzuf within him. This is done by cutting off all of the egoistic desires 
in his heart, and separating the pure from the impure in all his desires, on all 
the levels of his soul. 



The Eighth Commandment 


228. The eighth is to love an outsider from another nation, who desires 

to come under the wings of the Shechina, Malchut, who takes under her 
wings those who separate themselves from the other, impure side, and draw 
near her, as it is written: LET THE EARTH BRING FORTH A LIVING 
SOUL AFTER ITS KIND. 

Malchut, Nukva de ZA, is called the Shechina, for she does not distance from 
us even when our properties are distant from her, as it is said: WHEREVER 
YOU ARE BANISHED, THE SHECHINA WILL BE WITH YOU, and 
ABIDES IN THEM, IN THEIR IMPURITY. ZA is called Shochen (dweller) and 
Nukva is called Shechina. 

The revelation of the Creator in Malchut, of the Shochen in the Shechina, of 
ZA in Malchut of the world of Atzilut is possible only by a face-to-face Z ivug of 
ZON in Gadlut. This is because the Light of this Z ivug is so great that it reveals 
unity even in the most remote and concealed places, in the most opposite and 
uncorrected desires. 

However, the creation of Gadlut de ZON occurs gradually: first, a Partzuf 
of ZON in Katnut is created with the Light of VAK, and only then does it 
grow to reach Gadlut. Moreover, this process takes place in each state of ZON. 
Furthermore, even as ZON in Gadlut make a Z ivug and receive Ohr Hochma, the 
Light from their previous state of Katnut does not disappear, but facilitates a 
Z ivug in Gadlut. And this Light of Katnut is called the “Wings of Shechina.” 

Hence, it is written in the Torah: “And the cherubim shall spread out their 
wings on High, screening the ark-cover with their wings” (Shemot, 25:20). For the 
main thing is to cover the Light of the great Z ivug with their wings, so that even 
the most distant ones would receive the Light, and, at the same time, keep it out 
of the reach of the impure forces. 


421 



422 


The Zohar 


This is so because those who have yet to completely purify their egoistic 
desires are rejected by the Light for fear that the Light may fall to the impure 
forces. But now the wings guard the Light so vigilantly that even the closest ones 
will not err and let the Light through to the impure forces. 

Therefore, an outsider is one who decides to join the people of Israel (to 
correct his egoistic desires and make them altruistic), and to be circumcised 
(reject his egoistic desires), for his body (collection of desires) still retains the 
properties of the Or la, as his ancestors (previous spiritual states) did not stand 
at the foot of Mount Sinai (did not receive the Light, called the Torah, and were 
not corrected by it), i.e., have not yet rid themselves of the serpent’s impurity 
(have neither revealed all the impure egoistic desires within them nor recognized 
them as evil). Nevertheless, other altruistic desires have the power to elevate him 
to the level of Supernal purity. 

This occurs through raising MAN, by evoking the great Zivug of ZON (where 
the Wings of Shechina rule and cover the Light of this Zivug). We can also elevate 
the outsider’s soul (his yet uncorrected desires) to that level and sanctify it in the 
Light of this Zivug. 

And although this soul is not yet completely pure, it can receive the Light 
from this Zivug, for the wings protect it and do not allow its Light through 
to the impure forces (desires), even though they are very close to it. And it 
is said, UNDER THE WINGS OF SHECHINA, for this soul can receive the 
Light only from the wings of Malchut-Shechina, i.e., receive only the small, 
outer Light of Malchut. This is not the Light in the body of Malchut (Shechina) 
herself, let alone that of ZA (the Creator, Shochen). Rather, it is merely the 
Light of the Wings of Shechina. 

The outsider’s soul (his egoistic desires) can be corrected (made altruistic) 
only during the great Zivug, for only then is the Light protected by the Wings 
of Shechina. Hence, we (altruistic desires) must first raise MAN for the great 
Zivug, and receive its Light in our souls (desires corrected by the screen). Then, 
the Shechina spreads her wings, protects this Zivug, and takes the outsider’s soul 
under them. It follows that initially, we elevate the outsider’s soul with the help 
of our MAN, and then the Shechina takes it under her wings. 

229. One might say that the soul of Haya exists in Israel and is ready for 
anything. He specified, “After its kind,” which refers to both Israel and to an 
outsider. Like chambers and passages between them, the same exists in the 
land called Haya, under the wings. 



The Eighth Commandment 


423 


Here The Zohar tells us that although the new soul (the corrected properties 
called the “outsider”) receives the Light, just like the properties called “Israel,” 
Israel receives from the inner Light, whereas the outsider receives from the 
outer. It was already mentioned that wings designate the Light of VAK, received 
during the great Zivug, but from the previous state of Katnut, so as to cover the 
Light of the great Z ivug. 

This VAK includes Sefirot HGTNHY, where HGT are called “chambers,” in 
which one can abide and sit (sitting means Katnut as opposed to standing, which 
is Gadlut). The Sefirot NHY are called “passages,” entrances to the chambers, and 
it is impossible to sit there; their only role is to allow access to the chambers. 

The reason for this lies in the property of Tifferet, the main Sefira in HGT. 
Tifferet is their middle line, a complete Kli for the reception of Ohr Hassadim. 
And the main Sefira in NHY is Yesod, which constitutes their middle line. It 
contains no property of the receiving Kli, and is used only for passing the 
Light onto Malchut, for the creation of the Returning Light. Hence, NHY are 
called “entrances.” 

As for the outsiders (to purify from egoistic desires) from the seventy nations 
of the world (seventy egoistic properties), the chambers in HGT of the wings, 
as well as the passages in NHY of the wings are prepared for them. They receive 
Ohr Nefesh from the passages (NHY) and Ohr Ruach from the chambers (HGT). 

230. The right wing of Malchut has two passages, which are split from this 
wing in two so as to let in two nations that are close to Israel. And under the 
left wing there are two additional passages, called Amon and Moav. And they 
are all called the souls of Haya. 

Previously, The Zohar mentioned that there are many entrances-passages, 
yet now it speaks of only two. This is because it speaks in general: there are two 
entrances for the nations belonging to the right line, and two entrances for the 
nations belonging to the left line. There are also two nations in all of the right 
line, which include all the nations of the right side, and there are two nations of 
the left line, which include all the nations of the left side. 

The nations of the right side refer to the two general passages in the right 
wing. And The Zohar does not reveal what these nations are. And as for the 
nations of the left side, generally called “Amon and Moav,” there are two passages 
in the left wing that are meant for them. 

All the souls of the outsiders that come from all the nations are collectively 
called Nefesh Haya, for they can receive only from the great Z ivug of ZON when 



424 


The Zohar 


ZON are inside AVI. Thus, Malchut is called Nefesh Haya, for she receives Ohr 
Haya from AVI. And since the souls (Nefasho t) of the outsiders receive from the 
wings of Nefesh Haya, they are named after the received Light. 

231. Each wing contains a multitude of closed chambers and halls. From 
them, spirits emerge and are divided among all the outsiders, called Nefesh 
Haya, but each “after his kind.” And they all come under the wings of the 
Shechina, but no further. 

Each wing includes VAK (HGT NHY), called “passages” and “chambers.” 
Each nation has its own chamber in HGT and its own passage in NHY. Each 
receives Nefesh in the passages and Ruach in the chambers. It is written that the 
chambers are closed, since HGT de VAK have only Ohr Hassadim without any 
Ohr Hochma ; hence, they are called “closed.” 

232. However, the soul of Israel stems from the body of that tree (ZA), and 
from there the souls fly off to this land (Malchut). Therefore, Israel is the 
darling son of Malchut, and is sustained by her womb, and not by the wings 
that are on the outside of the body. Moreover, the outsiders have no part in 
the Holy Tree (ZA), especially not in its body. They refer only to the wings 
of Malchut, and no further. The outsider’s place is under the wings of the 
Shechina, and no further. The righteous among the outsiders also refer to 
the outer side, and not to the inner. It is hence written: LET THE EARTH 
BRING FORTH A LIVING SOUL ( Nefesh Haya ) AFTER ITS KIND. All 
receive Nefesh from that Haya, but each according to its kind. 

ZA is referred to as the “Tree of Life” and his Nukva is called the “Land of 
Life.” For in the state of Gadlut, they both ascend and clothe AVI, who have Ohr 
Haya (the Light of Life). Therefore, it is said that the soul of Israel stems from 
the body of that tree, meaning from ZA himself. 

And the souls from that tree fly off to the Land of Life: as a result of a Z ivug 
between the tree (ZA) and the land (Malchut), ZA gives the souls of Israel into 
Nukva, and Israel receives these souls from her, as opposed to the outsiders, who 
receive their souls from the wings of Malchut, but not from Malchut herself, not 
from what ZA passed to Malchut. 

The reason for this is that Nukva has three Partzufim, which clothe one 
another. They are called Pour (embryo), Yenika (nursing), and M ochin (adulthood, 
Gadlut). The big (M ochin) Partzuf is the innermost of the three, and is clothed by 
Partzuf Yenika, which is in turn clothed by Ihur. 



The Eighth Commandment 


425 


Israel receives from the innermost Partzuf (Gadlut of Nukva); hence, it is 
called the “darling son,” for it stems from the inner part of Malchut, and not 
from her outer part (wings). 

NHY de Malchut are called “womb,” for it is the place where the souls of 
Israel are conceived and grown. However, this does not refer to the NHY of 
the two outer Partzufim, called Ihur and Yenika, as they are the wings of the 
Shechina-Malchut. Here The Zohar refers to the NHY of the Partzuf in Gadlut, the 
innermost Partzuf (the womb of Malchut). 

This is what the words of the prophet refer to: “Is Ephraim a darling son 
unto Me? Is he a child that is dandled? For as often as I speak of him, I do 
earnestly remember him still; therefore, My heart yearns for him, I will surely 
have compassion upon him” (Yirmiyahu, 31:19). Because the souls of Israel stem 
from the inner part of Malchut, The Zohar says that they appeared from Malchut’s 
womb, from NHY of the Partzuf in Gadlut, and not from NHY of the two outer 
Partzufim, called “wings.” 

The outsiders (desires for correction) have no part in the Supernal Tree, 
especially not in its body. Their place is under the wings of the Shechina, and no 
further. The outsiders that come (to correct themselves) are called righteous, for 
the Shechina is also called the “righteous one.” They come under her wings and 
unite within her. Yet, they have no place above the Shechina, and receive from 
Nefesh Haya, from a Zivug of Malchut with ZA in Gadlut. But they only receive the 
portion of the Light called “wings”; hence, they are said to be under the wings 
of the Shechina, where each receives according to his properties. 




The Ninth Commandment 


233. The ninth is to show mercy to the needy and supply them with 

food, as it is written: LET US MAKE MAN IN OUR IMAGE, AFTER OUR 
LIKENESS, and this man will consist of two parts, male and female. IN OUR 
IMAGE refers to the rich; AFTER OUR LIKENESS refers to the poor. 

234. For from the male side, they are rich, but from the female side, they are 
poor. And as they are united together, merciful to each other, and help each 
other, so below should the rich and the poor be united as one, and should 
share with each other, and show mercy to one another. 

235. We see this in the book of King Shlomo (Solomon): he who shows 
mercy to the poor with all his heart, his image never differs from that of 
Adam, the first man. And since he was created in the image of Adam, he 
therefore governs all the creatures on earth by his image, as it is written: 
“And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the 
earth” ( Beresheet , 9:2), all fear that image, existing in him. For this M itzva, 
to show mercy to the poor, is the most important of all the M itzvot for 
elevating man to the image of Adam. 

236. How do we know this? From Nebuchadnezzar. Even though he dreamt 
a dream, as long as he had mercy upon the poor, that dream did not come 
true. However, as soon as he started looking badly upon the poor, his image 
changed at once, and he distanced from people. Hence, it is written, LET US 
MAKE MAN. It is said in the form as it was said of charity in another verse. 
Therefore, MAKE—is the same as charity. 

The rich and the poor correspond to the male and the female principles, to 
ZA and his Nukva. However, there is nothing here that hints at the obligation of 
the rich to be merciful to the poor and provide for his needs. But this instruction 
differs from the rest in that in all the others, the Creator’s command is separated 


427 



428 


The Zohar 


from the action that follows it, as it is written, AND THE CREATOR SAID: 
‘LET THERE BE LIGHT. AND THERE WAS LIGHT;’ and also, AND THE 
CREATOR SAID: ‘LET THE WATERS BE GATHERED...’ AND IT WAS SO; 
and so on in all the Mitzvot. 

And none of the other Mitzvot contain the Creator’s instruction mixed with 
action. This is so because the entire creation originated from AVI, where Aba 
spoke and lma acted—Aba gave the Light to Ima, and after he gave it to her, he 
started acting on it himself. For only with the property of Aba could creation 
not have manifested in action, as there are no boundaries in creation, in which 
actions could be revealed. 

Hence, Aba issues a command that designates the passage of Light from 
him to Ima. However, since this is merely a command, and not an action (like a 
force instead of an action), the future tense is used. The same language is used 
in the description of man’s creation: AND THE CREATOR SAID, “LET US 
CREATE MAN.” Note that the plural form is used: LET US CREATE. 

Before the creation of the world of Atzilut (called the world of correction), 
an action known as Shevirat HaKelim (the breaking of the vessels in the world 
of Nekudim ) took place in the spiritual worlds. It is written: “The Creator 
kept creating and destroying worlds, until He created this world (Atzilut), and 
He told it to stop spreading below the boundaries in which it was created” 
(Beresheet Raba, 3:7). 

The breaking of the vessels was essential, for it was the only opportunity to 
mix the egoistic properties (desires) with the altruistic ones; after all, distance 
in the spiritual is determined by the disparity of properties (desires). And that 
is why egoism and altruism are infinitely remote from each other. Yet, if this 
is so, how can egoism possibly be corrected? How can such properties or even 
notions of the existence of altruistic desires be introduced to man? 

So then, to allow egoistic desires to be corrected, the Creator performed the 
breaking of the vessels—the striking impact between opposite desires, egoistic 
and altruistic. It is called “striking,” for it is impossible to unite these desires by 
any means other than an “explosion.” 

As a result of this explosion, the altruistic, pure Kelim (desires) penetrated 
the egoistic, impure ones, and gave man an opportunity for free will and self- 
correction. After the destruction of the pure Kli and the descent of its parts into 
impurity, the world of Atzilut was formed. 

Out of all the mixed desires, the world of Atzilut selected only altruistic 
ones, attached them to itself, corrected them and filled them with Light. Out 



The Ninth Commandment 


429 


of these corrected parts, it made the worlds BYA with everything that exists 
within them. 

These corrections of the broken and mixed Kelim by the world of Atzilut 
are depicted in the first chapter of the Torah, which speaks of creation. It uses 
the instructions of exposing and separating the egoistic Kelim from the altruistic 
ones, as, for instance, in the following verses: AND THE CREATOR DIVIDED 
LIGHT FROM DARKNESS; THE CREATOR DIVIDED WATERS FROM 
DRY LAND; THE CREATOR DIVIDED DAY FROM NIGHT, and so forth. 
All these examples speak of the separation of the pure forces from the impure 
ones, of good from evil. And all that diverged became part of the pure system. 

Therefore, the entire act of creation is contained in the depiction of the first 
day of creation, in the words, LET THERE BE LIGHT, as this is when Light was 
separated from darkness. This is because, on the whole, purity is called “Light” 
and impurity is called “darkness.” And all the other definitions of purity and 
impurity are only particular names designating their various manifestations. 

The world of Atzilut made only a partial correction: it only separated 
altruistic desires from egoistic desires, Light from darkness, and thus created 
the system of creation, described in the beginning of the Torah. However, this 
does not complete the correction, as darkness and impurity are simply detached 
from participating in creation, but remain utterly uncorrected. They are simply 
separated as an entirely unnecessary part, and this completely defies the perfection 
of the Creator, who created everything (including darkness) for His final goal. 
Moreover, correction ends specifically with the correction of darkness, as it is 
said: “Night shines as day; darkness as Light.” (Tehilim, 139:12). 

To correct this, man was created containing everything, and consisting of 
all the properties of creation: from the absolute goodness to total evil. This 
enables man to execute the correction and achieve complete perfection. In other 
words, he must turn evil to good, bitter to sweet, and darkness to Light. As a 
result, death will disappear forever, and the Creator will manifest as the King of 
all creation. 

Hence, there is a great difference between the description of man’s creation 
and that of all the other creatures and parts of creation. Here, the action itself 
was mixed with the instructions, for the instructions, descriptions come from 
Ima, not from Aba, who said, LET US CREATE MAN—together with Malchut 
of the world of Atzilut. 

The reason for this is that Malchut includes everything, for she also gives the 
Light of sustenance to the impure forces to keep them from disappearing from 



430 


The Zohar 


the world, as, like all the other elements of creation, the impure forces cannot 
exist without Light, and immediately disappear. It is written in this regard: HER 
FEET DESCEND TO DEATH, for the impure forces receive a tiny spark of 
Light to sustain their existence. 

This is why Malchut is called Assiya (action), for she spreads and rules in the 
whole of creation. She is also called “darkness,” for she shines with a spark of 
Light, to sustain the darkness and evil. 

Hence, when Ima unites with Malchut and their properties mix, she receives 
the properties of darkness, of which it is said: LET US CREATE MAN IN OUR 
IMAGE, AFTER OUR LIKENESS, for Light is called “image,” and darkness is 
called “likeness.” Indeed, after Ima mixes with Malchut, these two forces, IMAGE 
and LIKENESS, appear in her as well. As a result, man, who was created by her, 
contains these two forces—IMAGE and LIKENESS, too. 

From the phrase, LET US MAKE, it follows that Ima consists of two parts, 
male and female. Although Ima is a male part (giving is a male property), she is 
connected to Malchut. Besides, the male property suggests the presence of Light, 
while the property of Nukva (the female part) is poverty and darkness. 

And since Ima accepted Malchut as her partner with the purpose of creating 
man (accepted the properties of Malchut), she is now filled with poverty and 
darkness. It follows that man consists of the properties of Ima (wealth and Light), 
as well as of the properties of Malchut (poverty and darkness). 

And it is this precise combination of the properties of Ima and Malchut that 
enables man to correct Malchut, fill her with Light, and spread spiritual purity 
and holiness throughout the entire earth (Malchut). It is written that at the 
end of correction, “the Creator and His Name shall be one,” for the darkness 
in Malchut will be transformed into Light, as in the male part, HaVaYaH. 
Everything will be as one in the male property, as it is said, “There will be no 
poor in your nation.” 

This Mitzva says that as Ima united with Malchut so as to correct her, which 
is why Ima includes Image and Likeness, man needs to correct his qualities in 
order to correct the parts of darkness within him. To this end, he must diminish 
his properties, just like Ima, and give his part (charity) to the poor Malchut, who 
is deprived of Light. He must show mercy to the LIKENESS (poverty) within 
him, and provide it with everything it needs. 

By observing this M itzva, man receives IMAGE and LIKENESS from Ima, 
the Upper Light that was received by Adam, created in IMAGE and LIKENESS. 
This is why he has the power to rule over all the animals in the world (all of his 



The Ninth Commandment 


431 


animal desires) to such an extent that no impure force (desire) remains within 
him, which he cannot defeat and correct. 

The Zohar gives the example of Navuchadnetzar (Nebuchadnezzar): although 
the Supreme verdict with regard to him was reached, his dream did not come 
true as long as he was merciful to the poor. However, as soon as he allowed his 
evil eye to look badly upon the poor, the sentence was immediately executed, 
and his image changed (those who are interested can turn to The Book of Daniel). 
Thus we see that this Mitzva is greater than all the others, and that it can overrule 
the Supreme verdict made against man. 

“Charity” signifies the union of Bina and Malchut. Similarly, the story 
about the marriage of Rut (Ruth) the Moavite, King David’s grandmother 
(Malchut), and Boaz, who was merciful to her (this marriage started Israel’s 
Royal Dynasty), describes the correction of Malchut by Bina (See Megilat Rut— 
The Book of Ruth). 




The Tenth Commandment 


237. The tenth M itzva obliges man to put on Tefillin and to attain the Supernal 
properties, as it is written, THE CREATOR CREATED MAN IN HIS OWN 
IMAGE. He opened and said, “Your head upon you is like the Carmel.” This 
text refers to the Supernal head—the Tefillin worn on the head of the Holy, 
Supernal King HaVaYaH, written in separate letters. Each letter in the holy 
name HaVaYaH corresponds to a certain paragraph in the Tefillin. Thus, the 
Holy, Supernal Name is written in the scrolls of Tefillin, in the secrets of the 
letters. For THE NAME OF THE CREATOR IS UPON YOU, AND THEY 
SHALL BE AFRAID OF YOU refers to the head Tefillin, which contains the 
Holy Name HaVaYaH. 

By being merciful to the poor, one merely begins to receive the Creator’s 
Supernal image. Bina absorbs the properties of Malchut, described by the verse, 
LET US CREATE MAN IN OUR IMAGE, AFTER OUR LIKENESS. By 
unifying Binas properties with those of Malchut, AHP de Bina (the letters ELEH) 
fell to ZON, and only the letters MI (GE) remained in Ima. AHP de Bina that 
fell to ZON consist of Aba and Ima: Aba assumes the properties of ZA, and Ima 
assumes the properties of Nukva. 

Since AVI descended to the place of ZON, they became like ZON. And from 
them ZON receive the state of Katnut, called TZELEM Elokim, likeness to Bina 
(VAK ), for Ima lost the GAR of her own state, that is, since her AHP fell to ZON, 
she lost the Light of GAR (see diagram on next page). 

Therefore, only the letters Ml = GE = K-H remained in Ima, whereas her 
B-ZA-M = AHP = ELEH fell to ZON. Thus, of the five Lights NRNHY that were 
inside Ima, she retained only O hr Ruach in Keter and Ohr Nefesh in Hochma. 
Thus, Ima can only give ZON the Light of VAK = Ruach + Nefesh, but not the 
Light of GAR = NRNHY. Also, ZON are considered to have acquired likeness to 


433 



434 


The Zohar 


the Upper One only upon receiving the Lights NRNHY. And this is achieved by 
the fulfillment of the Mitzva of Tefillin. 


Partzuf 

Malchut 

Keter 

Hochma 

Bina 


Light of 
Bina 


Partzuf 

Bina 

Yechida 

Chaya 

Neshama 

Ruach 

Nefesh 

} r 

Keter 

Hochma 

Bina 

ZA 

Malchut 

Parsa of the World of Atzilut 


ZA 


Malchut 


Yet, a question arises: we have already learned that to create the Partzuf of 
lower man out of ZON, ZON must ascend to AVI and receive the Light of GAR, 
for a small Partzuf without O hr Hochma cannot beget. So why is it said that Ima 
is in a state of Katnut 7 . 

When ZON attain reception of the Light of AVI, they thereby ascend to AVI 
and become similar to AVI in their properties, for each lower one that ascends 
to the Upper One becomes like it. Indeed, only the magnitude of the screen 
distinguishes between spiritual objects, as only the magnitude of the screen 
determines all of the object’s properties. 

Thus, upon ascending and clothing AVI, ZON become like AVI, and all the 
properties of AVI are now naturally adopted by ZON. Just as AVI create ZON, 
ZON in AVI beget and pass the Light into the Partzuf of lower man. Hence, there 
is no need to even change names, for everything occurs at the degree of AVI. 
And upon ascending there, ZON are already called AVI, and the Light that they 
pass to man is regarded as the Light intended for ZON. 

It is written: THE CREATOR CREATED MAN IN HIS OWN IMAGE. 
The Hebrew word “image” that is used in the Torah is TzeLeM, and is formed by 
three letters: Tzadi-Lamed-Mem. In item 2, we said that there are no Kelim for O hr 
















The Tenth Commandment 


435 


Haya and Yechida ; rather, there are only Kelim Bina-ZA-Malchut for the Lights 
NRN: Nefesh'Ruach'Neshama. 

So even when we say that there is a Kli called Keter, we imply that the 
count starts with Bina de Keter, not with Keter de Keter. Bina and ZON, the 
Kelim that remained in the Partzuf, are divided into three lines: the line of 
Bina—HBD, the line of ZA—HGT, and the line of Malchut—NHYM. This is 
characteristic of Ohr Hassadim. 

Bina - Hochma 

Daat - Bina 

Gevura - Hesed 

Tifferet - ZA 

Hod - Netzah 

Yesod 

Malchut- Malchut 

However, when Ohr Hochma is transferred, Partzuf Bina divides into two 
Partzufim: AVI and YESHSUT. These constitute HBD = three and HGT = three. 
Along with ZAT = seven Sefirot, from Hesed to Malchut, and form the Gematria 
of thirteen (3 + 3 + 7) of the word E chad, which alludes to the complete name, 
state, and attainment. 

The thing is that Sefirot Keter and Hochma are concealed in AA, and only its 
Sefira Bina sends her Light down. This Sefira Bina de AA is divided into two Partzufim, 
AVI and YESHSUT: her GAR shines in AVI and her ZAT shines in YESHSUT. 
These two parts of Bina are called M (Mem) and L (Lamed) of the word TzeLeM: 

1. AVI are called M of the word TzeLeM, as they form a closed ring 
guarding Ohr Hochma, preventing it from reaching the other, lower 
Partzufim. This Ohr Hochma is referred to as “concealed” (from all the 
Partzufim of the world of Atzilut), and only Ohr Hassadim, Ohr Ruach, 
descends from them to all the Partzufim of the world of Atzilut during 
the 6,000 years until the end of correction. 

2. YESHSUT is called L of the word TzeLeM, as it bows its head (GAR) 
and resembles a tower. It is written about this tower: “The Tower of 
Oz (strength) of the Creator’s name.” This is because YESHSUT is 





436 


The Zohar 


called a “tower,” and ZA is known as the “righteous one.” After all, 
YESHSUT is ZAT de Bina, the properties of ZON that are included in 
Bina; hence, it passes its Ohr Hochma to ZON. 

If ZON in Katnut are filled with O hr Hassadim (Ruach called Avir— air), then 
during the reception of Ohr Hochma from YESHSUT, the letter Yod in the word 
Avir exits, and Avir turns into Ohr (Light). Hence, YESHSUT is called a “tower,” 
i.e., a Partzuf in Gadlut that contains Hochma, soaring in the air {Avir). 

However, this state in ZON is inconstant. YESHSUT intermittently returns 
to Katnut and to Gadlut; therefore, such a state is called “soaring.” ZA is called 
T z (Tzadi) of the word TzeLeM, for such is his property inside this tower. Thus: 

- AVI— M (Mem)—Hochma that is concealed inside a ring. 

- YESHSUT— L (Lamed)—Bina, though as she ascends to AA, she becomes 
Hochma (tower) and passes Ohr Hochma down. 

- ZON—T z (Tzadi)—Daat, receives the Light from YESHSUT. 

However, one should not confuse the three letters Tz-L-M with the three 
lines called HBD: TzeLeM consists of three Partzufim, one inside the other. 
Partzuf Hochma (M of the TzeLeM, AVI) is the innermost Partzuf; Partzuf Bina 
(YESHSUT, L of the TzeLeM) clothes it from Chazeh de AVI downward; and 
from Chazeh de YESHSUT downwards, Partzuf Bina is clothed by Partzuf Daat, 
ZA, T z of the word TzeLeM. 

The words, THE CREATOR CREATED MAN IN HIS OWN IMAGE 
(TzeLeM), mean that with the help of the spiritual observance of the Mitzva of 
Tefillin, Ohr Hochma is received in accordance with the ascending order of the 
letters Tz-L-M. This is the Light that Adam received after his creation, whereas we 
first stimulate the reception of this Light in ZON, and from ZON we stimulate 
its reception into ourselves. 

THE HEAD TEFILLIN CONTAINS THE NAME OF THE HOLY KING, 
INSCRIBED IN THE LETTERS HaVaYaH-the head Tefillin is the name of 
the Supernal King, inscribed in the letters HaVaYaH. The Tefillin are called the 
Carmel (Car Maleh— all goodness), as it is written: YOUR HEAD UPON YOU 
IS LIKE THE CARMEL. This is because when the heads of ZA and Malchut put 
on the head Tefillin (the Upper Light of TzeLeM), they become like the Carmel 
(Car Maleh— all goodness). 

This Light is called “The name of the Supernal, Holy King,” the four 
letters of HaVaYaH, where each letter is written separately: Yod-Hey-Vav-Hey. 
And the reason why man feels that the letters are written separately is that each 



The Tenth Commandment 


437 


Partzuf contains the four letters of HaVaYaH, and each of them designates an 
independent Partzuf. 

Every letter constitutes a separate passage on the parchment (in the 
Tefillin); four separate passages correspond to the four letters of HaVaYaH. A 
passage (Hebrew— Parashah) represents a separate and complete Partzuf, and its 
corresponding letter in HaVaYaH symbolizes the Light in this Partzuf. The order 
of Partzufim corresponds to the order of the letters of HaVaYaH: Yod-Hey-Vav- 
Hey. Such a Tefillin is called the Tefillin of Rashi. 

However, there is a Tefillin with the order of passages ( Partzufim) Yod-Hey- 
Hey-Vav, called Tefillin Rabeinu Tam. The passages that are written on fragments 
of parchment are identical, but the order of putting them into the boxes of 
Tefillin Rabeinu Tam is different: Yod-Hey-Hey-Vav. 

238. The first passage in the Tefillin corresponds to the letter Yod of the 
name HaVaYaH (Hochma ) and refers to the Mitzva, “Sanctify to Me all the 
firstborn.” This is because Hochma is the firstborn of all the Supernal Ones. 
It opens the place of conception for the future firstborn with the help of 
a thin line of Light that emanates from Yod, which opens the womb and 
impregnates it. 

AVI are designated by the letter Yod of the name HaVaYaH, where Yod 
signifies Aba and the filling of Yod (according to its pronunciation: Yod = Yod + 
Vav + Dalet), i.e., Vav + Dalet constitutes Ima. Partzuf AVI is called “holy” and 
“first born,” for Partzufim YESHSUT and ZON are called holy only when they 
receive holiness (Ohr Hochma ) from AVI. All the holiness in the world of Atzilut 
comes from AVI. 

This is so because Ohr Hochma is called “holiness” and AVI is Mem of the 
word TzeLeM (Hochma de Atzilut), for the Supernal Hochma of the world of Atzilut 
is concealed within them. AVI themselves are defined as Bina in the property 
of Hassadim, as Hochma is concealed within Rosh de AA, and the lower ones can 
receive it only if Bina ascends to Hochma, to Rosh de AA, where Bina unites with 
Hochma of Rosh de AA and assumes the name Hochma. However, she is not the 
ordinary Hochma; she is called “Hochma of the thirty-two paths” of descending 
Ohr Hochma, and only this Hochma bestows Ohr Hochma upon all the Partzufim 
of the world of Atzilut. 

This is why The Zohar says that this thin ray of Light, called the “path of 
Light,” opens the womb and conceives the future offspring. Yod consists of three 
parts: (i) the upper “spike” of the letter Yod, a small line above the point, which 
is called Rosh and designates Partzuf AA that is concealed in AVI; (ii) the body of 



438 


The Zohar 


the Yod, which forms PartzufAVI ; and (iii) the lower “spike” of the letter, which 
designates Yesod, the end of PartzufAVI. 

Through the continuous Zivug between Yesod de Aba and Y esod de Ima, the 
great waters descend onto all the lower worlds with all that inhabits them. This 
Zivug on Ohr Hassadim is called a “Zivug that revives the worlds.” Y esod de Ima 
is also called Rechem (womb), for all Rachamim (mercy) stems from this part of 
Its Partzuf. Yet, if AVI do not make a Zivug, this part of Ima is closed, and mercy 
does not descend below. Only Yesod de Aba can open Yesod de Ima, whereupon 
Ima passes her great waters to the lower ones. 

239. The second passage in the T efillin, WHEN YOU COME, corresponds 
to the first letter Hey of the name HaVaYaH, the hall (Bind) that opens up 
under the influence of the letter Yod (Aba) in fifty entrances, passages, and 
chambers concealed within it. The revelation that Yod made in that hall was 
done so as to hear the voice of the Shofar (a ram’s horn), Bina. The Shofar 
is closed on all sides, but the letter Yod came and opened it so that its sound 
could be heard. And since it opened the Shofar and derived sound from it, 
Yod led all to freedom. 

The letter Hey of the name HaVaYaH is YESHSUT, L in the word TzeLeM. It 
is called a “tower soaring in the air,” a hall with fifty entrances, for the concealed 
AVI are designated by the M of TzeLeM, by the ring that surrounds Ohr Hochma 
and prevents it from shining outside. And they shine only with Ohr Hassadim. 

However, by rising to Rosh de AA, where Bina turns into Hochma, YESHSUT 
can pass Ohr Hochma to ZON. Bina, who turns into Hochma in order to receive 
Hochma for ZON, is called the “fifty gates of Bina,” for she consists of five Sefirot 
KHB- ZA-M, ten in each. Each of these fifty Sefirot consists of a chamber and 
an entrance: HGT are called a “chamber” and NHY are called an “entrance,” 
a “passage,” implying the absence of a Kli for reception. Instead, it serves for 
transferring the Light into, or out of the chamber. 

Therefore, the second passage used in the Tefillin: AND WHEN YOU 
COME designates the letter Hey in the name HaVaYaH, YESHSUT of the world 
of Atzilut, which ascends to accept Ohr Hochma and pass it on to ZON below. 

Yod opened this hall so as to hear the voice that comes from the ram’s horn, 
for this horn is closed on all sides. As was already mentioned, YESHSUT (Bina) 
united with Malchut by lowering her three Sefirot ELEH (Bina and ZON) to 
ZON, while YESHSUT remained with only two Sefirot K-H, MI. 

Then, as a result of raising MAN, Malchut descends from the Eynaim (eyes), the 
Eynaim of YESHSUT open up, Malchut descends to her own place in the Peh, and 



The Tenth Commandment 


439 


the three letters ELEH reunite with MI to form the name ELOK/M. GE = K-H de 
ZON ascend to Bina along with these ELEH. However, although ELEH ascended 
and joined MI, die name ELOKIM is still considered closed, for it has only Ohr 
Hochma, and Ohr Hochma cannot shine in ELEH without Ohr Hassadim. 

These three letters ELEH are therefore defined as a horn (Shofar), and ZON 
that ascended to Bina along with ELEH are concealed within diem. And these 
ZON in ELEH are referred to as a “voice.” This voice sounds in die hall with die 
help of die letter Yod, for Yod designates AVI that bestow die Light from Above, 
which facilitates die lowering of Malchut from Nikvey Eynaim de YESHSUT to 
her place in die Peh, and raising ELEH back to Bina. Hence, Yod opens up the 
hall of Light in YESHSUT in order to pass this Light to ZON from the Shofar 
(the ascended letters ELEH). 

ZON, too, ascend to Bina along with ELEH and there receive Hochma. This 
great Light in ZA is called a “voice,” and its reception is known as “listening to 
the voice.” However, this horn is closed on all sides, on the sides of Hochma and 
Hassadim, for the letters ELEH (called a “horn”) fall to ZON, where they remain 
closed and inaccessible both to Ohr Hochma and to Ohr Hassadim. 

Consequently, two corrections are needed: (i) to elevate and unite them 
with Bina, enabling them to once more attain their Ohr Hochma ; (ii) to provide 
them with Ohr Hassadim so it can serve as a garment for Ohr Hochma. 

First, Yod (AVI) pass the Light to Hey (YESHSUT), whereupon ELEH rise 
above Malchut, to Bina, together with ZON, and there receive Ohr Hochma. 
However, this Ohr Hochma is called concealed or closed, for it cannot shine 
without being clothed in Ohr Hassadim. This means that the voice has not yet 
emerged—ZA has not yet been born. 

After that, Yod enters into the word Light = Ohr ; hence, it turns into Avir 
= air (Ohr Hassadim). And since the horn (the letters ELEH) received air (Ohr 
Hassadim), they can beget ZA (the voice of the Shofar), for being clothed in Ohr 
Hassadim, Ohr Hochma can enter ZA. 

The general Light that ZA receives is called “voice.” And this voice frees 
all the slaves that were enslaved by the egoistic desires in all the worlds, for ZA 
shines down on all the lower ones. Thus, the sons of Israel (man’s spiritual 
aspirations) merit the Light of deliverance (defeat the earthly, egoistic ones). 

240. At the sounds of the Shofar, the sons of Israel were delivered from Egypt. 
And so shall the Shofar be blown in the future, the next time at the end of 
days. And all deliverance originates from this Shofar, which is Bina. This is 
why the deliverance from Egypt is mentioned in this chapter of the Torah, for 



440 


The Zohar 


this Shofar stems from the force of the letter Yod, which opens the womb and 
delivers the captives to freedom. And this is the letter Hey, the second letter 
of the name HaVaYaH. 

All of the Light in ZON comes from the horn ( ELEH ), including the great 
Light that delivers Israel from Egypt, and the Light that is destined to be revealed 
in the future, at the end of days (complete deliverance from egoism). This is why 
the Tefillin contain a passage that refers to the exodus from Egypt, for the Light 
delivering from Egypt comes from the horn, which is inside YESHSUT. This is 
done by the power of AVI, called Yod de HaVaYaH, which open the womb of 
YESHSUT (ELEH) and free the voice (ZA) from its captivity. 

This Light has sufficient power to deliver Israel from slavery. Only after the 
attainment of this Light (O hr Haya ), and not a degree lower, can ZA and Nukva 
be called “voice” and “speech.” All deliverance comes only from O hr Haya (only 
upon ascending the spiritual degree of Ohr Haya can man liberate himself from 
egoism and become free). 

241. The third passage in the Tefillin is the secret of the Unity in “Hear O 
Israel,” the letter Vav in HaVaYaH, which includes all and designates ZA, 
who contains the unity of all. Everything merges in unity within him, and 
he receives all. The fourth passage that reads, “You shall hear,” includes two 
sides, Hesed and Qevura, which unite with the Assembly of Israel, called 
the lower Qevura or Malchut. And this is the last letter Hey of the name 
HaVaYaH, which takes and includes them all. 

The third passage in the Tefillin (Hear O Israel) is Partzuf ZA, the letter Vav 
in HaVaYaH, which includes all four passages contained in the Tefillin. Although 
the first two passages (AVI and YESHSUT) represent Hochma and Bina, they do 
not really constitute Hochma and Bina themselves, but rather, their part, which 
clothes in Rosh de ZON, called M and L of TZeLeM de ZA. 

Similarly, the fourth passage, Malchut of ZA, does not imply that this is 
Malchut herself. Rather, it refers to her part that is included in ZA and is called 
Mochin (brain) de Gevura. There are three parts of Mochin in ZA: Hochma, Bina, 
and Daat, which are accordingly called M, L and T z of TzeLeM de ZA. They are 
the same H-B- ZA-M as in Mochin de ZA. This is because Daat (T z) includes Hesed 
and Gevura. And this Hesed in Daat is defined as ZA himself, and Gevura is 
defined as the inclusion (of the properties) of Nukva in ZA. And these H-B-ZA-M 
constitute the four passages contained in the Tefillin. 

This is why ZA, the letter Vav in the name HaVaYaH, includes all four 
passages. And all the unions that come from AVI and YESHSUT are done within 



The Tenth Commandment 


441 


him, i.e., for his sake. For all the Higher Partzufim that precede ZA are united 
(with the Creator), and need no MAN from the lower ones to reach the state of 
unity. Whereas all the MAN raised by the lower ones to the Upper Partzufim are 
meant solely for the unification of ZA, and in no way affect the constant unity 
of the Higher Partzufim with the Creator. 

The unification of Hochma with Bina, as a result of which Bina becomes 
like Hochma, occurs only on account of ZA being raised to Bina in the form of 
MAN. For when ZA is raised to Bina as MAN, Bina ascends to Rosh de AA and 
there receives Hochma for ZA. Since Bina aspires only to mercy (O hr Hassadim), 
she never receives Ohr Hochma for the Creator’s sake, but only if the lower ones 
are in need of it. Her role, her properties are only to bestow, and not to receive. 
(Note that in the spiritual, “reception” is always for the Creator’s sake.) 

Hence, Bina ascends to Rosh de AA only for the sake of ZON. And it is ZA 
alone that ascends to Bina and stimulates her to ascend to Rosh de AA, where she 
makes a Zivug with Hochma and passes this Light to him. It is therefore said that 
ZA receives all, as Bina passes everything that she receives in Rosh de AA to him. 
And Ohr Hochma is revealed only in the place of ZA (not Bina), as he descends 
back to his place below Chazeh de ZA. 

The prayer “Hear O Israel” designates ZA, the letter Vav of the name 
HaVaYaH, the Supernal unity (item 207) that reveals love only from the good 
side. And since it refers only to “Love your Creator...,” it contains no restrictions 
or strictness of judgment. 

However, in the fourth passage, “You shall hear,” the last Hey of the name 
HaVaYaH, Nukva de ZA that is included in him, Gevura in Rosh de ZA, reveals 
both sides of love—good, as well as evil (item 206), reflected in the words of this 
passage. It ends with the words: “Blessed be His great name for ever and ever,” 
which corresponds to the inclusion and unity of Nukva in ZA, meaning not 
Nukva herself, but her part in ZA, i.e., Mochin de Daat. 

Gevura in Daat is the second Hey in HaVaYaH. It accepts all the Light of 
the Supernal unity contained in “Hear O Israel,” and includes all. And since it 
contains all the perfection of unity, it reveals all the Light and both sides of love, 
for the property of judgment that complements love to perfection exists only 
within it, and not Above. 

It is therefore written: “Your head uponyou is like the Carmel,” designating 
the head Tefillin. Indeed, after ZA is clothed in all four Lights, designated by 
the four paragraphs of the Tefillin, which are the three letters T z, L, and M of 



442 


The Zohar 


the word TzeLeM, his head is defined as the Carmel (Car Maleh— completely 
filled with goodness). 

242. Tefillin are the letters of the holy name. Therefore, “Your head upon 
you is like the Carmel” refers to the head Tefillin. The letter Dalet refers to 
the hand Tefillin, Malchut, who is depleted of Light, compared to the head 
Tefillin, ZA, but she contains the perfection of the Upper One. 

The hand Tefillin designates Malchut. And she is poor in comparison with 
Bina, the Upper World. Yet, she has her own perfection, for she now receives it 
from Bina thanks to the unity between Nukva and ZA in “Blessed be His great 
name for ever and ever.” 

And since she is not the Nukva that is included in ZA (his body), but a 
separate Nukva of ZA, she takes all four passages from him, H-B-ZA-M of ZA, for 
she has a separate, complete Partzuf. However, these four passages of the Torah 
are in the same place; they are not separated from each other by partitions, as 
in the Tefillin of ZA. 

The reason for this is that a passage of the Torah is the Light, and the place 
where it dwells is a Kli (the Tefillin in our world is a box made of a “pure” animal’s 
skin, into which four parchment scrolls are placed, and the corresponding 
passages from the Torah are written on each). As we know, every Z ivug emanates 
Light. Since ZA receives four Lights H-B-H-G in four Kelim, as a result of four 
Zivugim, he contains four compartments for four passages, each compartment 
containing a particular passage from the Torah. 

However, no Z ivug is made on Malchut herself. Everything that Malchut has, 
she receives from ZA. Malchut receives all four Lights (four passages from the 
Torah that result from one Z ivug with ZA); hence, she has only one place for all 
four passages (Lights). 

243. “The King is held captive in the tubs” means that he is tied down and held 
in those four compartments of the Tefillin for the purpose of being properly 
united with that holy name. And he who makes this correction, exists in image 
and likeness, TZELEM, with the Creator. Just as the holy name is united in 
the Creator, the holy name is united in him. “Male and female he created 
them” refers to the head and the hand Tefillin. And it is one. 

“The King is held captive in the tubs” signifies ZA, who is bound and 
unified in those compartments of the Tefillin. The compartments of the Tefillin, 
which contain the passages from the Torah, are called “tubs” or “troughs,” just 
like the tubs from which sheep drink water, for the waters of Ohr Hochma and 



The Tenth Commandment 


443 


Ohr Hassadim are bound and restricted by these Kelim, the compartments of the 
Tefillin. And it is the Creator who is bound tight and held in these Kelim, so as 
to be unified in the holy name. 

The compartments of the Tefillin are the TNHY of Tvuna, the lower part of 
YESHSUT (Israel-Saba and Tvuna, where Israel-Saba is the male part and Tvuna 
is the female). This part of Tvuna is called the big letter Dalet of the word Echad 
(one) in the verse, “Hear O Israel, our Creator is one.” It is written about this 
letter: “Let the dry land appear.” 

As was already mentioned in the third M itzva, because this “dry land” was 
revealed in ZA, he can pass the Light to Malchut. Thus, were it not for these four 
places in ZA, the dry land within him, he would have been unable to give the 
Light to Nukva. Hence, it is said that ZA “is tied down and held in those places” 
that stem from dry land so as to enable him to unite and pass the revelation of 
the Creator’s Light into the holy name, Nukva. As a result, the dry land becomes 
fertile and produces fruit. 

Therefore, he who has completed the corrections of these four passages 
from the Torah acquires the image and likeness (TzeLeM) of the Creator. In 
other words, when man “below” (below the world of Atzilut, in the worlds BYA) 
“puts on” the Tefillin (attains the level of this degree), he receives the Light of H- 
B-H-G from ZA. This Light is called TzeLeM, since Hochma and Bina are called M 
and L, whereas Hesed and Gevura are called Tz■ And just like Elokim, Bina unites 
with the holy name of Malchut, thereby uniting the holy name within man, for 
man is a part of Malchut. 

There are two parts—male and female—in the Light of Hochma and Bina 
(called TzeLeM): TzeLeM of ZA and TzeLeM of Nukva, the head Tefillin and the 
hand Tefillin. Hence, it is said that the Creator created a man and a woman, 
referring to the head Tefillin and the hand Tefillin. 




The Eleventh Commandment 


244. The eleventh M itzva is to give a tithe of the fruits of the earth. Here 
there are two M itzvotx to separate a tithe of the fruits of the earth, and to 
bring the first fruits of the trees, as it is written, “Behold, I have given you 
every herb-yielding seed, which is upon the face of all the earth” ( Beresheet , 
1:29). Here it is written, I HAVE GIVEN YOU. Elsewhere it is written, “And 
to the children of Levi, behold, I have given all the tithe in Israel” ( Bamidbar , 
18:21). It is also written, “And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of 
the land or of the fruit of the tree, is the Creator’s” ( Vayikra , 27:30). 

These verses say that the Creator gave everything to Adam. Yet, why does 
that oblige us to separate a tithe, to bring the first fruits of the earth, and why are 
we forbidden from eating them? After all, this contradicts the aforesaid. 

The thing is that the process of (spiritual) nourishment includes exposure, 
selection, and separation of the holy sparks of the Light from the impure forces. 
In the process of feeding (reception of Light), the sparks of the Light (Nitzotzin) 
that are contained in the food unite with man’s soul, with his very flesh, and the 
waste, except for the sparks, leaves the body. This continues throughout man’s 
life (6,000 degrees of ascent); he gradually accumulates within him all the holy 
sparks, with which he complements his soul. Without them, the soul cannot 
attain completeness and perfection. 

I think that the reader already understands that The Zohar in no way speaks 
about the process of feeding, digestion, and secretion of our physical body. As 
the whole of the Torah, The Zohar speaks only of the goal of creation and the 
ways of its attainment. Therefore, I call upon the reader (in defiance of what his 
mind suggests to him after the first reading) to realize that these texts are written 
in the language of branches, when spiritual objects are described in the language 
of our world; yet, despite the corporeal language, the objects remain spiritual! 


445 



446 


The Zohar 


It is written in the weekly portion Lech Lecha that Adam was forbidden to 
eat meat: “I have given you every herb...” (Bereshee t, 1:29). However, since Adam 
sinned, and egoism, impurity entered his body, it was said to Noah: “Every 
moving thing that lives shall be for food for you; as the green herb have I given 
you all” (Bereshee t, 9:3), that is, including meat. 

Since Adam was created in absolute perfection, everything was sorted and 
corrected within him, which corresponds to the animate part of creation, as it 
is written (Beresheet, 2:19): “Out of the ground the Creator formed every beast 
of the field,” and also, “whatsoever the man would call every living creature, 
that was to be the name thereof.” This means that Adam attained every name 
(spiritual level) of the animal souls, for the pure forces were already separated 
from the impure ones. 

Hence, Adam was not given the task of exposing, sorting, and correcting 
animals by eating them, for even before the creation of man, the Creator 
corrected this in the world of Atzilut. And only the inanimate and vegetative 
(parts of the soul) remained uncorrected, containing both pure and impure 
forces. Therefore, Adam was instructed to expose the sparks that his soul lacked 
in the inanimate and vegetative food. 

However, as a result of Adam’s sin, pure and impure desires (forces) were 
mixed once more. And as Adam’s soul was shattered into many parts, all 
of which fell into the impure forces, all the animals (animate desires) were 
corrupted along with him (with the human level of desire). Thus appeared the 
need to expose, sort, and correct them. Therefore, after the sin the Creator 
ordered Adam and the subsequent generations to eat animals, and thus extract 
the sparks from impurity. 

It is said that Adam was created IN THE IMAGE AND AFTER LIKENESS, 
i.e., with the help of the TzeLeM Elokim, the Light of Bina, by the four passages 
from the Torah in the Tefillin. And this is his soul. However, after he was born 
with this holy soul, thanks to his good deeds, he merited raising MAN and 
receiving Ohr Haya, and then, on Shabbat, attaining Ohr Yechida as well. 

Therefore, Adam was left to correct the creation with the help of only a tithe 
and offerings. And by feeding on tithe and offerings, he attained the revelation 
of his desires and raised MAN to the level of Ohr Haya and Yechida. Yet, after 
he sinned, all of his corrections and everything that had filled his soul was 
corrupted, mixed, and egoism took over the body. 

Due to our egoism, tithe and offerings are forbidden for us, for fear that we 
will desire Supernal purity. Instead, we are obliged to extract and pass them on 



The Eleventh Commandment 


447 


to the Cohanim and Levi’im (parts of the soul). And if we observe this Creator’s 
M itzva of spiritually separating a tithe of the fruits of the earth and the offerings 
(as He commanded), we will receive die strength to raise MAN and receive Ohr 
Haya on Shabbat (the ascent of the worlds is called Shabbat) in the same way that 
Adam attained this state while feeding on tithe and offerings. 

Thus, after man receives Ohr Neshama by putting on the Tefillin, he can raise 
MAN with the help of the two M itzvot (tithe and offerings) in order to receive 
Ohr Haya. As it is explained, Adam was receiving Ohr Haya by feeding on tithe 
and offerings. However, we are forbidden to feed on them (to try to receive 
this Light for the Creator’s sake) because of the egoism that acts in our body 
(desires). Instead, we are bid to give a tithe and the offerings to the Cohanim and 
the Levi’im. As a result, we receive the strength to receive this Light. 




The Twelfth Commandment 


245. The twelfth is to bring the first fruits of the trees as an offering, 

as it is written, “And every tree in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed” 
( Beresheet , 1:29). All that is worthy of Me shall not be eaten by you. I have 
given you My permission and I have given you all the tithe and offerings of the 
trees. “To you,” and not to the subsequent generations. 

From the aforesaid, it becomes clear that we, the subsequent generations, are 
forbidden to feed on tithe and offerings. The Light called “tithe” and “offerings” 
is so great that until all the Kelim (desires) of Adam’s soul have been corrected, it 
is impossible to receive it for the Creator’s sake. 

Hence, it is forbidden to even try, lest we sin, as it happened to Adam. There 
is a Mitzva to not receive this Light, which refers to Malchut de Malchut. Every 
time the sparks are revealed, it is sufficient to let this Light be, to refrain from 
receiving it during the 6,000 years. Herein lies its actual correction until, at the 
end of correction, the Creator’s great Light, called M ashiach (Messiah), manifests 
and gives us the strength to receive tithe and offerings for the Creator’s sake. 


449 




The Thirteenth Commandment 


246. The thirteenth is to perform the redemption of a first-born son so 

as to strengthen him in life. For there are two appointed angels in charge—one 
over life and one over death. And they both rule over man from Above. And 
when man redeems his son, he redeems him from the angel in charge of death, 
so that the angel can no longer govern the first-born son. Hence, it is written, 
AND THE CREATOR SAW EVERYTHING THAT HE HAD MADE-this 
is in general, AND, BEHOLD, IT WAS... VERY GOOD alludes to the angel 
of life, while the word VERY alludes to the angel of death. Therefore, by this 
act of redemption, the angel of life is strengthened and the angel of death is 
weakened. Life is purchased by this redemption, for the evil side leaves him be 
and clings to him no more. 

The ascent of the worlds occurred on the sixth day of creation: ZA ascended 
to the place of AA, Malchut ascended to AVI, and Adam attained O hr Haya. As 
a result, the angel of death (egoism) lost his power completely. On the contrary, 
he became very good, for upon being corrected, egoism becomes a great and 
holy Kli, the one Kli that can receive the greatest Light. 

Such a state will come at the end of the general correction, when, due to the 
revelation of this great Light, death (egoism) will disappear forever. This is the 
meaning of the verse: “when the Creator saw EVERYTHING that He had made 
(i.e., at the end of all creation), He saw that it was very good.” 

However, since Adam’s sin, the worlds can no longer ascend as high. This 
is why we need special Mitzvot in order to perform special preparations and 
actions for the reception of O hr Haya, at least in a state called Shabbat. This 
is precisely the M itzva to redeem one’s first-born son, when we weaken the 
powers of the angel of death and strengthen the angel of life, much like what 
the Creator did to Adam by the preliminary ascents of all the worlds, for 


451 



452 


The Zohar 


during such an ascent, called Shabbat, the angel of death becomes very good. 
Such is the power of that M itzva. 

Yet, it is not observed as fully as previously, when the angel of death lost 
all of his power. Now, by observing the Mitzva of redemption of the first-born 
son, we merely distance from the angel of death without actually destroying the 
impure forces, and they no longer cling to him. And after preventing the impure 
forces from clinging, accomplished with the help of this M itzva, he can receive 
life, i.e., Ohr Haya of the state of Shabbat. 



The Fourteenth Commandment 


247. The fourteenth M itzva is to observe Shabbat, which is a day of rest from 
all the actions of creation. There are two M itzvot here: to observe the day of 
Shabbat and to adorn its holiness, namely to receive O hr Hochma, called 
“holiness?” and to observe Shabbat as a day of rest for all the worlds, in which 
all actions are multiplied and realized even before this day is sanctified. 

Shabbat is a state of the spiritual worlds where the Light descending from 
Above elevates ZA to AA, Nukva to AVI, the worlds of BYA to YESHSUT, and 
ZON of the world of Atzilut. As a result, man’s NRN (whoever has it, whoever is 
spiritually present in the worlds of BYA) also ascends to Atzilut with the worlds 
of BYA, and there receives O hr Haya. 


ZA¬ 

M¬ 

BIA 


It follows that there are two Mitzvot: to refrain from working and carrying 
things from one household to another. This is so because when all the worlds 
are completely freed from the impure forces, we must guard against the impure 
forces, so they do not return and mingle with the holiness of Shabbat. And he 
who works causes the impure forces to mingle with the pure ones. 

The second M itzva is to adorn the day of Shabbat: through the pleasures of 
Shabbat (the ascent of the worlds of ABYA), man receives (in his spiritual desires 
existing in the world of BYA) the Light of the world of Atzilut from Above. This 
Light of Atzilut is called “holiness” (Hochma); hence, man becomes sanctified by it. 


Atik 

AA 

AVI 

- YESHSUT + ZON 

-Parsa of the World of Atzilut 


453 



454 


The Zohar 


All purifications and corrections take place only in our work and struggle 
with the impure forces, preventing us from drawing nearer and merging with the 
Creator in our properties. It is precisely in the wars with the impure forces that 
we extract the sparks of the Light that they swallowed up, and each extraction of 
a spark of the Light from the impure forces and its ascent to the world of Atzilut 
is defined as independent, individual work. 

In the beginning, these sparks were sorted and extracted from the impure 
forces by the Creator Himself. This is described in His actions in the six days of 
creation. And when all the extractions of the Light sparks ended, the work was 
considered finished, and the corrected state, called Shabbat, arrives; and it is the 
day of rest, for there is nothing else to correct. 

Hence, Shabbat is the day (the state when the Light shines in the worlds) 
when all the correction work in all the worlds ceases. For every Shabbat (the 
state of ascent in the spiritual worlds to the level of correction of all the impure 
forces), the same state of the perfection of creation’s first Shabbat returns and 
brings rest to all the worlds of ABYA. All the impure forces become detached, 
remote, and return to their place (Tehom Raba —great abyss), and all the worlds 
ascend to the world of Atzilut, defined as perfect unity. And we are destined 
to receive this holiness, the Light of the world of Atzilut; it descends upon us 
through our observance of the two Mitzvot: REMEMBER AND GUARD THE 
DAY OF SHABBAT. 

248. Because that day was sanctified, the creation of bodiless spirits was to be 
completed. Asks: “Was the Creator unable to delay the sanctification of that 
day until the bodies for those spirits were created?” And answers: “The Tree 
of Knowledge of Good and Evil contained an evil side that wanted to govern 
the world. And many spirits separated and went forth, armed, to clothe in the 
bodies of this world.” 

Because that day was sanctified, the creation of bodies for the spirits was to 
be completed. This means that the day had been sanctified before the Creator 
had time to create bodies for those spirits. It is written about this on the first 
Shabbat of creation: “And on the seventh day the Creator finished His work, 
which He has made; and He rested on the seventh day from all His work, which 
He has made.” 

This passage from the Torah is unclear. For if the Creator completely 
finished all His work by Himself, then He left nothing for us to do. After all, 
He finished everything Himself. However, the Creator sorted the Light sparks 
and separated the pure forces from the impure ones precisely to enable us to do, 



The Fourteenth Commandment 


455 


i.e., to complete this work by making our own efforts in the observance of the 
Torah and Mitzvot. 

And the rest that is mentioned here refers only to what the Creator Himself 
had to do. Therefore, the Torah says that the Creator finished His work, for 
He has completed all the preparations for us, and nothing else is required of 
Him, for the rest HE HAS MADE for us to do. This enables us to do and to 
complete creation. 

Hence, it is written that the Creator did not have time to create bodies for 
the spirits before the arrival of Shabbat. These bodiless spirits constitute all of 
our impure and evil forces that drive man to transgressions. And the Creator 
intentionally left them this way, for it is precisely because they are present within 
us that we have freedom of will in our work with the Torah and M itzvot. 

As a result of Adam’s sin in Malchut, called “The Tree of Knowledge of 
Good and Evil,” pure and impure forces were mixed. At that, the impure forces 
wished to rule over the forces of good in the world, so the forces of good would 
never prevail over them. Thus, a number of armed spirits went forth, intending 
to attack the bodies, capture them, and clothe in them. 

Two points merged in Malchut: one was corrected by receiving the properties 
of Bina, mercy, and the other is the strictness of judgment, the result of 
restrictions within Malchut herself. When Malchut is united with the pure forces, 
her property of restriction is concealed, and the point of mercy is revealed (item 
123). Then man is said to merit only goodness. 

However, if man transgresses, he attacks the good point and thereby reveals 
the point of restriction in Malchut. Thus, the forces that wish to harm and destroy 
the corrected part and to rule over man become revealed, and this is evil. 

However, if he merits for the point of mercy to reveal itself and dominate, 
he can elevate Malchut to Bina, thereby causing Supernal mercy and Light to 
descend. However, if he does not merit, and the point of restriction is revealed 
in Malchut, not only does he thereby harm Malchut, but he also harms the point 
of Bina that unites with Malchut. Thus, this point turns from good to evil, 
from mercy to judgment, as restriction is revealed in Malchut herself, and every 
revealed property dominates. 

This is why the point of judgment was revealed in Malchut after Adam’s sin. 
By this, Adam damaged the point (property) of Bina that united with Malchut, 
too, turning it from mercy to strictness, judgment. Yet, the correction of Malchut 
is possible only with the help of this point, for it is called “goodness.” And when 
this point of Bina is revealed within her, Malchut is called “goodness,” too. 



456 


The Zohar 


But now that the very point of Bina in Malchut was damaged and turned 
from good to evil, the impure force thought that the time has come for it to 
dominate the world and clothe human bodies, meaning Adam and his sons 
(spiritual Partzufim). In other words, the body (desires) of the impure force 
inherits the place of Adam’s body. Thus, the correction of Malchut from the 
good point becomes impossible, for no more goodness comes to Malchut from 
Bina, and this property has become evil, strictness, and judgment, due to the 
restricted reception in Malchut. 

And many armed and destructive impure forces went forth to attack so 
as to clothe human bodies (desires) in this world, and rule over them. For the 
impure force thought that nothing could protect and save the pure forces from 
it because of the harm that Adam’s sin brought to the system of governance and 
the point of mercy in Malchut. 

249. However, as the Creator saw this, He roused the wind from within the 
Tree of Life, ZA, and struck the other Tree, Malchut. And the other, good 
side was awakened, and the day was sanctified. For the creation of bodies and 
the awakening of spirits on that night of Shabbat stem from the good side, 
and not from the evil one. 

Since the Creator saw the strengthening of the power of judgment and 
the impure forces, their ability to clothe the bodies in this world (completely 
excluding the possibility of correcting the world in the future), He roused the 
wind within the Tree of Life and struck the other Tree (made a Z ivug with it), 
Malchut. Due to this Z ivug, the Tree of Life passed the spirit of life to the other 
Tree, Malchut, thus enabling Malchut to tear away from the impure forces. 

As a result, the good side reappeared in Malchut, as it was prior to Adam’s 
sin, and the sanctity of Shabbat descended to the world. That is, although the 
impure forces had the strength to clothe in bodies, and were more powerful 
than the pure forces, and, according to the law, they were supposed to prevail, 
at that moment the Creator intervened, disregarding the destruction caused 
by Adam’s sin. 

Consequently, ZON (the Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge of Good) 
united in a Z ivug, as before Adam’s sin, and the Light of sanctity of Shabbat 
descended into the world. This action of the Creator caused Shabbat (the Light 
of Shabbat ) to descend into the world, and the impure forces lost the opportunity 
to clothe in human bodies in this world. The impure force remained as a bodiless 
spirit, which enables man to draw closer to the Creator (with his properties). 
This is referred to as his return (Teshuva). 



The Fourteenth Commandment 


457 


The creation of bodies and the arousal of spirits on that night of Shabbat 
stems from the good side, and not from the side of the impure forces, for the 
Creator’s action remains in creation forever. Just as on the first Shabbat of 
creation, the Creator completely disregarded the damage of Adam’s sin, instead 
compelling Z ON to make a Zivug, and the day was sanctified as before the sin, 
for He destroyed all the power of the impure forces, despite the fact that they 
had the strength to rule. 

The same applies to all Shabbatot (plural for Shabbat)—the spiritual ascents 
for those who exist in the worlds of BYA—during the 6,000 years. Although 
man is still full of impurity, for he has yet to correct the sins of the Tree of 
Knowledge, when he makes a Zivug (of the Light with a screen) on the night of 
Shabbat (in a spiritual state of that name), the impure forces (of man) have no 
power over him (his altruistic desires). In this Zivug, man assumes the body and 
spirit of a newborn, as though he was unharmed by Adam’s sin, as though he 
himself corrected the Tree of Knowledge. 

And despite the fact that man has yet to merit liberation from his egoism, 
the impure forces have no power over him on that night. Thus, he can receive 
the bodies and spirits in his Zivug on the side of the Tree of Good, but not from 
the impure forces. 

250. And had he hastened on that night to put forward the other side, before 
the good side came forward, he would not have been able to withstand it for 
even an instant. But the Creator provided the remedy in advance. And He 
sanctified the day beforehand. And He warned to appear before the other 
side. And the world exists. And that the opposite side thought to rule in the 
world, i.e., in defiance of it, the good side was created and strengthened on 
that night. And the good, holy bodies and spirits were created on that night 
from the good side. Therefore, the delight of sages who know this spans from 
Shabbat to Shabbat . 

251. However, when the other (impure) side saw that what it had planned 
to do was already done by the holy side, it started to check its own forces 
and properties, and saw all those who perform a Zivug naked and in the 
candlelight. Therefore, all of the sons born from that Zivug are enslaved by 
the spirit of the other side. And these naked spirits of the wicked are called 
“harming,” and they are ruled and killed by Lilit. 

252. And since the day was sanctified, and holiness rules in the world, the other 
side diminishes itself and hides on each Shabbat day and on each Shabbat 
night. With the exception of Asimon and his group, who walk secretly in the 



458 


The Zohar 


Candlelight, to observe the naked Zivug. And then they hide inside the cave, 
called Tehom Raba (the great abyss). And as soon as Shabbat ends, many 
hosts fly and prowl in the world. As a result, everything is corrected by the 
song of the sufferers, “He who dwells in concealment,” to prevent impurity 
from governing holiness. 

According to the law, the impure force was supposed to rule in the world, for 
it was stronger than the pure one, and it was to clothe in human bodies. But then, 
the earth would have been given over to the wicked, and all the generations in the 
world originating from man would have stemmed from the side of the impure 
forces. And there would have been no chance of correction, for impurity would 
have dominated over all the generations to such an extent that there would have 
been no opportunity to get hold of the good side even for a moment. 

However, the Creator provided a remedy, thereby forestalling the defect, for 
He elevated Shabbat and removed the impure forces, which caused the Light of 
peace and rest to be revealed in all the worlds. And all the impure forces were 
thrown into Tehom Raba (the great abyss). Thus, the world was revived, as this 
enabled the creation of bodies and spirits from the pure side in a Zivug of the 
Shabbat night, and the world advances toward the desired goal. 

So what does it mean to forestall the defect via a remedy? The whole of 
creation is based on a cause and effect sequence, and all that transpires not 
according to the worlds’ development is called “forestalling” (skipping several 
degrees, bypassing some of the causes and effects in this chain). 

And since the sanctity of Shabbat came as an awakening from Above, from the 
Creator’s desire, without any desire or request from below, for Adam had yet to 
make any corrections and draw closer to the Creator in order to merit Shabbat (when 
the Creator Himself prevented the defect by providing a remedy for the correction 
of the world), this action on the Creator’s behalf is called “forestalling.” 

Just as the impure force planned to assume power over the world, the good 
side forestalled its actions on that night. For this night that followed the sin 
in the Tree of Knowledge was given entirely to the impure forces. Hence, they 
thought that they would obviously rule over the world. However, the opposite 
had happened—sanctity took their place: pure bodies and spirits were created 
on that night by the good side. This is because such a preparation took place 
that all the Zivugim on that night created bodies and spirits from the good side, 
without any participation of the impure force. In other words, what transpired 
was exactly the opposite of the impure force’s expectations. 

Therefore, the time of sages who know this spans from Shabbat to Shabbat— 
for at this time, bodies and spirits are created from the pure, good side. And 



The Fourteenth Commandment 


459 


when the impure force sees that what it wanted to create was created by the 
opposite side, it collects its evil powers and searches through die whole world, 
and sees all those who make a Z ivug in die candlelight, exposing their naked 
bodies. And ill sons are made from this Z ivug. The impure side sends these 
sons its evil spirits of the wicked, called “wreckers.” As a result, they are ruled 
and killed by Lilit. Garments refer to Ohr Hassadim, die garments of Ima, die 
intention “for die sake of die Creator.” 

When die sanctity of Shabbat conies into the world, and Shabbat rules in the 
world, the power of the impure force dwindles and hides on the night and on 
the day of Shabbat. Hence, this is the time of sages. 

And only the wreckers, called “Asimon and his group,” walk secretly in the 
candlelight, to observe those who expose their Z ivug. Afterward, they hide in 
the Nukva of Tehom Raba. Thus, although Asimon has the power to see the Z ivug 
in the candlelight and on Shabbat, he cannot do harm on Shabbat, but must 
immediately return to the Nukva of Tehom Raba. Only after Shabbat is over can 
he resume causing harm. 

Rabbi Shimon felt the difficulty of explaining the words regarding Shabbat 
being the time of sages. For each day (not only on Shabbat night), starting at 
midnight, the Creator walks around the Garden of Eden and makes Z ivugim with 
the sages. The Zohar asks the same question ( Veyikahel, item 194), and answers 
that there is a difference between a Z ivug on a week night and one that is made 
in the candlelight on Shabbat. On weekdays, the impure force has the power to 
inflict maladies on the newborns, and Lilit has the power to kill them. 

However, on Shabbat nights, although the wrecker Asimon and his group are 
present, he has not the power to harm, but only after Shabbat is over. However, 
opposite his opportunity to cause harm after Shabbat there exists a correction, 
called Havdalah, the separation of Shabbat from the weekdays through a blessing, 
a prayer, and a cup of wine, which completely annul the power of this wrecker. 
Hence, there is a significant difference between a Z ivug on a week night and a 
Z ivug on the night of Shabbat. 

The thing is that there is a source of Light, ZA, Supernal unity, and a source 
of fire, Malchut, lower unity (item 209). Also, there are three details in the 
candle flame (this refers to a spiritual candle, designated in corporeality by a 
wick floating in olive oil): 

- White Upper flame; 

- Lower flame; 

- The coarse part—wick and oil, supporting the lower flame. 



460 


The Zohar 


This lower flame is called “devouring flame.” It designates judgment, the 
power of restriction in the candle. Thus, it devours everything below it, the wick 
and the oil. And the Upper white flame signifies mercy contained in the candle, 
for white means mercy. 

And he who makes a Z ivug in the candlelight will see his children damaged, 
and Lilit will be able to kill them, for the candle contains the strictness of 
judgment, and the impure forces can therefore cling to such a Z ivug. Due to the 
strictness of judgment, their bodies (the impurities contained in the bodies that 
participate in a Z ivug, each of which finds what suits them) become revealed. 

Therefore, a Z ivug is permitted only at midnight, i.e., only in the darkness, 
when there is absolutely no Light, when Malchut is said to “awaken at night,” and 
mercy is revealed. However, if there is some candlelight, it reveals the impurity 
in the bodies, and the impure forces cling to them. 

In the candlelight, the impure force sees impurity in the bodies of those 
making a Z ivug, and it informs on them and clings to their bodies. However, all 
the restrictions of strictness and judgment disappear on the night of Shabbat, 
and the coarse lower flame becomes like the white Upper flame. This means 
that even candlelight is permitted. Moreover, under the influence of the sanctity 
of Shabbat, all the impurity disappears from man’s body, hence there is no fear 
to reveal the body in the candlelight. 

Yet, even on Shabbat, when the coarse flame turns white and the judgment 
of restrictions disappears, the white flame of the candle nonetheless requires 
the light’s coarse part, so it would act as foundation. And the coarse foundation 
designates an indispensable presence of judgment and restrictions, for coarseness 
constitutes restriction. 

Nevertheless, these restrictions do not appear on Shabbat. This resembles 
a coin without any image, so its denomination is unknown. Therefore, the 
wrecker, this coarse, detrimental part of the candle that supports the white 
flame, is called Asimon (Hebrew, Token), signifying a coin without image. 

The coarse part of the candle secretly ascends along with the white 
candlelight, as the candle cannot burn without it. Hence, this coarse part sees 
the exposed Z ivug and can therefore do harm after the end of Shabbat. Although 
the revelation (exposure) of bodies does no harm on the night of Shabbat (the 
impurity of the body remains concealed during Shabba t), as soon as Shabbat is 
over, the impure force can reveal itself and harm. 

And since, after Shabbat, Asimon and his group return to their forms 
(properties) and rise up from the Great Abyss ( Tehom Raba ) to the place of 



The Fourteenth Commandment 


461 


settlement, they soar above the world and can cause harm. There is a song: 
“He who sits in the shadow of the Supernal One,” for man saves himself from 
harmful forces by praying and returning to the Creator: 

“He who sits in the shadow of the Supernal One (dwells under the shelter of 
the Supernal One) dwells in the shadow of the Almighty. I will say to the Lord: 
‘my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust.’ Surely he will save you 
from the fowler’s snare and from the deadly pestilence. He will cover you with 
his feathers, and under his wings will you find refuge; his faithfulness will be 
your shield and rampart. You will not fear the terror of night, nor the arrow that 
flies by day, nor the pestilence that stalks in the darkness, nor the plague that 
destroys at midday. A thousand may fall at your side, ten thousand at your right 
hand, but it will not come near you. You will only observe with your eyes and 
see the punishment of the wicked...” (Tehilim, 91:1-8). 

253. What places do they visit on the night of the end of Shabbat1 When they 
come out in haste and wish to govern the holy nation, they see it standing in 
prayer and singing this song: “He who sits in the shadow (concealment) of the 
Supernal One,” first separating Shabbat from the weekdays in his prayer, and 
then over a cup of wine, these forces flee thence and fly away to the desert. 
May the Merciful One save us from them and from the evil side. 

Here the question concerns only the night of the end of Shabbat, but not 
the night of weekdays, as the night of the end of Shabbat still contains some 
force of the sanctity of Shabbat. Hence, although the impure forces rise from 
Tehom Raba and fly to conquer Israel, when they see Israel’s actions in song of 
prayer and in the blessing over a cup of wine, they fly away to the wasteland, an 
unpopulated place. Thus, people escape their reach. 

It follows that impure forces dwell in three places: 

- On Shabbat, they dwell in Nukva of Tehom Raba and have no power to 
cause harm; 

- When Shabbat is over, they are kept in the wasteland with the help 
of prayer, Havdalah, separation of Shabbat from weekdays, and the 
blessing over a cup of wine. They have the power to cause harm, but 
can’t, as they are in an unpopulated place; 

- On other nights they are also present in populated places. 

254. The three that cause evil to themselves: a) he who curses himself; b) he 
who throws away bread or bread crumbs bigger than an olive; c) he who lights 
the candle at the end of Shabbat before Israel attains sanctity in the prayer, 
“And You are holy.” And the light from that candle ignites hellfire. 



462 


The Zohar 


255. There is a place in hell for those who transgress Shabbat. And as they are 
punished in hell, they curse him who lit the candle before its time, and they 
say to him, “Behold: the Creator will thrust you about with a mighty throw, 
and He will seize you firmly. He will violently roll and toss you like a ball into 
a large land; there shall you die” (Yeshayahu , 22:17T8). 

One wrecker is called the “evil eye.” And he loves cursing, as it is said; 
“Yea, he loved cursing, and it came unto him; and he delighted not in blessing, 
and it is far from him” (Tehilim, 109:17). When man curses himself, he thereby 
empowers the evil eye to love cursing, and it rules over him—thus, man brings 
harm to himself. 

There is nothing in this world that does not have an Upper Root Above. 
Especially bread, on which man’s life depends, has its own special root Above. 
Therefore, he who neglects his bread brings harm to the root of his life Above. 
Everyone understands this, but only to the extent of the portion that satiates 
him, giving him life. 

However, if a piece of bread and crumbs are smaller than an olive, there 
are those who neglect and throw them away, as such amount cannot satiate 
man. Yet, the sages instructed us to bless as a meal even an olive-sized amount 
of bread, obliging us to treat such portion as satiating, so we have no right to 
neglect such an amount. And he who neglects it brings harms to himself. 

The reason for this is explained in the Talmud: “They asked the Creator: 
Master of the world, it is said in your Torah that one should not turn his face 
and accept bribes. Yet, You turn Your face to Israel...” The Creator replied: 
“How can I help turning my face to Israel if they observe the law ‘down to the 
size of an olive...’” (Berachot, 20:2). In other words, by accepting an olive-sized 
bread crumb as a satiating meal, we merit revealing the Creator’s face, even 
though we are unworthy of it. Therefore, those who neglect the amount of bread 
the size of an olive and do not consider it a satiating meal do not merit revealing 
the Creator’s face; hence, they bring harm to themselves. 

He who lights the candle at the end of Shabbat before Israel has reached 
sanctity in the blessing, thereby ignites hellfire. This is because prior to that 
moment, it was Shabbat; its sanctity prevailed, and hellfire has no power on 
Shabbat. Hence, he who transgresses Shabbat and lights the candle prematurely, 
Ignites hellfire and brings harm to himself, for the transgression of Shabbat is 
regarded as the gravest transgression. Hence, there is a special place in hell for 
those who transgress Shabbat. And they who are punished in hell curse the 
sinner for igniting hellfire prematurely. 



The Fourteenth Commandment 


463 


256. For lie should not light the candle at the end of Shabbat before Israel 
separates Shabbat from the weekdays in their prayer and over a cup of wine, 
as until that time, it is still Shabbat, and the sanctity of Shabbat still rules 
over us. And during the separation by means of blessing over a cup, all those 
hosts and legions that the rulers appointed to govern the weekdays return 
each to their place to resume the work for which they are responsible. 

The main prohibition remains in effect only until the blessing in the prayer. 
Nevertheless, one should beware of lighting a candle before the actual separation 
of Shabbat from the weekdays in the blessings over a cup, as it is still Shabbat. 
Of course, one can light a candle for the actual separation of Shabbat from the 
weekdays, i.e., for the blessing over a lit candle. 

257. As soon as Shabbat starts and the day is sanctified, holiness awakens 
and rules over the world; the power of weekdays disappears and returns only 
when Shabbat ends. However, although Shabbat is over, other forces do not 
regain their power until Israel says the prayer, “He who separates holiness 
from the weekdays.” Only then does holiness disappear, and the legions that 
govern the weekdays awaken and return to their places, each to its above- 
appointed post. 

258. Nevertheless, the impure forces do not assume control until the flame 
of the candle is lit, for they all come from the root (element) of fire, from 
which everything originates, and they descend to rule over the lower world. 
All this happens if one lights the candle before Israel has finished the blessing 
in the prayer. 

Malchut is called the “pillar of fire” (item 209), and the forces that exist in 
the candlelight are the restrictions in Malchut. It is impossible to use these forces 
before the candle is lit. 

259. Yet, if he waits until they complete the blessing, the wicked in hell justify the 
Creator’s justice over them, and they bring upon him all the blessings, recited 
by the congregation: “Therefore, the Creator gives you of the dew of Heaven,” 
“Blessed shall you be in your town,” and “Blessed shall you be in the field.” 

By reciting the blessings, we evoke the descent of the great Light, and its 
power saves us from hell. And since the wicked in hell see this, they regret 
committing their sins and justify the Creator’s judgment brought upon them 
by seeing their punishment. And since man evoked such justification of the 
Creator’s judgment, all the blessings, recited at the end of Shabbat by the 
congregation become fulfilled in him. 



464 


The Zohar 


260. “Blessed is lie who considers the poor; the Creator will deliver him in the 
day of disaster” (T ehilim, 41:2). What do the words “in the day of disaster” 
mean? This refers to the day when evil gains power and wants to take his soul 
away from him. The word “poor” alludes to someone very sick. “He who 
considers” refers to one who realizes the need to be cured from transgressions 
before the Creator. Another explanation is that this is the Day of Judgment in 
the world. “He who considers” signifies one who knows how to save himself 
from it, as it is written: “The Creator will deliver him in the day of disaster,” 
meaning that on the day when the judgment against man dominates the 
world, the Creator will deliver him. 

“The day of disaster” is a state when the impure forces, called “evil,” govern 
man and take his soul away. “He who considers the poor” is one who tells 
the sick to return to the Creator to correct himself. It is him who the Creator 
delivers from the rule of the impure forces. 

The Zohar continues by saying that there are three sources of evil for the soul 
of a man that attracts it onto himself. Hence, it advises one who considers and 
is compassionate to the poor, to appeal to the sick man’s heart (he who feels 
sick in his own evil, egoism) to return to the Creator. Then the Creator will cure 
him. And on this day of disaster, which man caused to his soul, the Creator will 
deliver him through this reward. 

Even if judgment dominates the world, the Creator will deliver him, for 
he taught the sick to return to the Creator and explained to them the need for 
correction. And the difference in the explanations is that the first refers to an 
individual who discovers evil within himself, and the second refers to the evil 
of the entire world. And here, the Creator, too, will deliver man as a reward for 
fulfilling this M itzva. 



The Intention in the Prayer 


It is written in The Zohar ( Veyikahel , pp. 32-52): “Each day a voice calls upon 
all people in the world, ‘This depends on you. Separate a part of yourself and 
devote it to the Creator.’” At some point in life, thoughts and desires to draw 
closer to the spiritual come to every person, and it depends on us whether or 
not we heed that inner call. The voice reassures man that by casting aside his 
needless, transient, and earthly desires, by ceasing his endless chase for their 
appeasement, he will attain true and eternal happiness. 

From this we can understand the secret meaning of prayer: he who fears 
the Creator and directs his heart and desires in his prayer, carries out great 
and exalted corrections. If one wishes to enter the spiritual realm and feel the 
Creator, the only thing he must do is pray, i.e., ask the Creator to correct his 
nature, to transform it from the nature of our world (egoistic) into the nature 
of the spiritual realm (altruistic). He will then enter eternity and transcend 
the boundaries of our world. Being completely enslaved by his egoism, man is 
unable to change himself on his own. 

To correct himself, man needs to receive the strength that exists outside of 
him, beyond the bounds of his egoism. He must ask to receive this strength; 
hence, the only thing man must do is pray. 

However, prayer is not uttered by one’s mouth. Rather, it is the desire in our 
heart, for the Creator reads the desires in our hearts. Therefore, man’s only task 
is to transform his heart’s desires—for his heart to wish to change its own desires. 
Yet, even this man is unable to do it by himself; he must ask the Creator for it. 

Thus, everything boils down to exalting the Creator’s rule, faith in Him, in 
His singularity, His power, His ability and desire to help. All of man’s efforts aim 
to create the only true desire within him—to feel the Creator! Here, The Zohar, 
as well as all the other books of Kabbalah and the Torah, speak of those who 


465 




466 


The Zohar 


have already attained the spiritual worlds with their desires and properties, and, 
while being in our world, perceive and exist in the two worlds simultaneously. 
The prayer the book refers to here constitutes the spiritual actions of one who 
has already acquired spiritual instruments, and can utilize them in exactly the 
same way we use our hands and auxiliary means in our world. 

First, in the songs and hymns of the Supernal angels, and according to the 
order of chants sung by the sons of Israel below, Malchut adorns and corrects 
herself as a wife who adorns herself for her husband. The sons of Israel are those 
who wish to become Yashar (straight) and El (Creator), i.e., to draw closer to, 
or go straight to the Creator. Such people, who exist in the Upper Worlds with 
their spiritual (altruistic) instruments (desires), can change the states of Higher 
Sefirot and worlds by their spiritual actions. 

Our prayer-book was compiled by the sages of the Great Assembly twenty 
centuries ago. Before that, everyone addressed the Creator in accordance with 
what he or she felt. About twenty centuries ago, coarser souls began descending 
to our world, which needed orderly prayers. Hence, the members of the Great 
Assembly (great Kabbalists) created the prayer book that we still use today. 

In an orderly fashion, the prayer book expounds all the consecutive degrees 
of man’s correction. Behind the words of the prayer book, one who understands 
sees the spiritual actions that he needs to perform. This information is conveyed 
in letters, in their forms and combinations, as well as in the sequence of sentences 
and parts of the whole prayer. 

According to the order of the prayer, correction of the worlds comes first 
by the morning blessings (See Tefilat Kol Peh) up to the prayer of Shmone Esreh, 
correction in a sitting position. Then, when they reach the words Emet ve Yatziv 
that conclude Kriyat Shema, all the worlds achieve correction. And as they reach 
the words Gaal Israel, all the corrections are to take their places; hence, they 
continue reciting the Shmone Esreh prayer while standing. 

In spirituality (and, consequently, in corporeality) a person can be in one 
of three states: lying, sitting, or standing. A newborn infant in our world and 
a spiritually newborn person develop in the same order. Lying means that the 
position of the head, the legs, and the body are at the same level. In the spiritual, 
this corresponds to the embryonic state, when all that exists in the ten Sefirot is 
the same. This is the lowest spiritual state. 

Sitting means that the head is above the body, and the body is above the 
legs, but one cannot use his legs. Such a state is called Katnut (smallness) or VAK. 
Standing implies absolute distinction between the levels of the head, body, and 





The Intention in the Prayer 


467 


legs. It is called Gadlut (big state) or GAR. Thus, according to one’s ability to ask 
for correction, he gradually receives strength from the Creator and grows. 

Therefore, when he reaches the words Emet ve Yatziv, everything has already 
been corrected: all of the worlds bear Malchut in them, while Malchut herself 
bears the Supernal King. When man reaches the words, Gaal Israel, the Supernal 
King advances along the degrees, along the three lines, and comes forward to 
receive Malchut. 

The Supernal King (the Creator), with regard to all created beings, constitutes 
ZA of the world of Atzilut, for Malchut de Atzilut is the sum of all creations. 
Everything that was ever created, including us and all the worlds with all that 
inhabit them, is a part of Malchut. 

In our initial state, we are the parts of Malchut that receive the smallest 
portion of the Creator’s Light, Ner Dakik (tiny candle). As we draw closer to the 
Creator in our properties (making them similar to His), we receive increasingly 
greater Light, in proportion to our advancement, which we feel as infinite bliss, 
peace, delight, eternity, and as a life-force. 

The degrees of our closeness to the Creator (our “I” and Him, Malchut 
and ZA) are described in Kabbalah using a special language: the nearing of 
properties is considered a transition from the state of “back to back” between ZA 
and Malchut to the state of “face to face.” The souls’ union with the Creator is 
described as a Zivug— sexual act between ZA and Malchut, whereupon ZA passes 
the Light to Malchut, and each soul, in proportion to its correction, can thereby 
receive this Light. 

Naturally, the Creator remains in a state of absolute rest, and all His alleged 
movements are felt with regard to Malchut, depending on the changes in her 
properties. At times she feels Him more and at times less, and she perceives this 
as His movement toward her. 

We must stand in humility and awe before the Supernal King, each in his 
place, for He extends His right hand to Malchut in Magen Avraham, the first 
blessing in the Shmone Esreh prayer, designating the right line. Then He puts His 
left hand under the head of Malchut, as it is written: “Let his left hand be under 
my head, and his right hand embrace me” ( Shir ElaShirim, 2:6) in the blessing At a 
Gibor, the second blessing in the Shmone Esreh prayer, designating the left line. 

The entire magnificent Shir ElaShirim (Song of Songs) speaks of the Supernal 
merging of all the creatures with the Creator. Since our world is created as a 
reflection of the spiritual world, spiritual merging can only be described with the 
corresponding words of our world. Because our world is egoistic, the spiritual, 



468 


The Zohar 


altruistic actions, directed toward the merging of properties and desires, are 
described in the words of our world as Malchut (man’s soul) drawing closer to the 
Creator in her properties, followed by their gradual unification. First, it manifests 
in the form of an embrace, followed by a kiss, then a coition, when the soul is 
sufficiently corrected to receive the Light (O hr Hochma) from the Creator. 

Afterward, ZA and Malchut embrace and unite in a kiss of the blessing 
HaEl HaKadosh, designating the middle line. From this state and higher on, 
everything transpires in the state of a kiss, up to the last three blessings in the 
Shmone Esreh prayer. This is the spiritual, true meaning of the first three blessings 
of the Skmone Esreh prayer. 

In other words, if one is able to make a spiritual action that corresponds to 
the conditions described in these blessings, he attains unity with the Creator 
that it is called “embrace” and “kiss.” The detailed explanation of the spiritual 
actions is given in The Study of the Ten Sefirot by Rabbi Ashlag. The language of 
The Zohar and the Torah describes these actions with words of our world. 

The language of Kabbalah describes them by using the names of Sefirot, 
Partzufim, and Lights. The most complete and precise language for the description 
of spiritual actions is the language of Sefirot. Therefore, this was the language 
chosen by Kabbalists for their inner work and for explaining to us the practice 
and method of spiritual ascent. 

Man must aspire to the Creator in his heart and desires in order to acquire 
the intentions that bring him to correction in all the spiritual states described in 
this prayer—for his mouth and his heart (desires) to become a single whole, so his 
lips will not speak against the wishes of his heart. The Creator awaits only the 
sincerity of our desires so as to fulfill them at once and bring us closer to Him: 

Beloved of the soul, Compassionate Father! 

Draw Your servant to Your will. 

Your servant will hurry like a hart, will bow before Your majesty. 

To him Your friendship will be sweeter 

Than the dripping of the honeycomb and any taste. 

Majestic, Beautiful Radiance of the universe! 

My soul pines for Your love. 

Please O God, heal her now showing her the pleasantness of Your radiance. 

Then she will be strengthened and healed 

And eternal gladness will be hers. 



The Intention in the Prayer 


469 


All-worthy One, may Your mere y be aroused 

And please take pity on the son of Your beloved. 

Because it is so very long that I have yearned intensely to see the splendor of strength. 

These my heart desires, and please take pity and do not conceal Yourself. 

Please be revealed and spread upon me, my Beloved, the shelter of Your peace. 

Illuminate the land with Your glory, we shall rejoice and be glad in You. 

Make haste, do love, for the time has come, and pardon us as in days of old. 

(Song Yedid Nefesh) 

When the Creator and Malchut merge in a kiss, he who needs advice and 
assistance can ask for it, for this state is called the “time of desire.” And since 
man appealed before the King and Queen in the twelve intermediate blessings 
of the Shmone Esreh prayer, he thereby corrected and prepared his heart’s desires 
for the last three blessings. He aroused the Creator’s desire for him, for thanks 
to these last three blessings, he merges with the Creator in Supernal Unity. 

The “time of desire” is an appropriate state for making requests and receiving 
the answer—the strength for self-correction. The King and Queen are ZA and 
Malchut. Each blessing constitutes a sequence of individual corrections of man’s 
soul. Consequently, man ascends to a Higher spiritual level. Thus, he gradually 
attains Supernal Unity with the Creator. 

Then, he must fall on his face, and when Malchut holds the souls within 
her, submit his soul to the Creator’s absolute power, as this is the appropriate 
time (state) to entrust one’s soul amongst all the other souls, for Malchut is the 
source of life. 

To fall on one’s face and entrust one’s soul means that man has but a 
single desire—to completely rid himself of his egoistic desires, and receive the 
Creator’s altruistic desires in their stead. Upon receiving the Creator’s desires, 
man becomes similar to Him, and to the extent of his similarity, he merges with 
the Creator. By merging with the Creator, man acquires all that the Creator has: 
immortality, complete knowledge of all creation, might, and perfection. 

The secret of the Light is available only to the chosen ones: when Malchut 
holds human souls by her single desire to merge with the Creator (because the 
same desire fills man’s heart), he submits himself entirely to the aspiration for 
this merging, so as to include his soul in the collective merging between Malchut 
and the Creator. And if his soul is received by the Creator, man instantly merges 
with Him and enters the source of life (T zror HaChaim), both in this world and 
in the world to come. 



470 


The Zohar 


Although Kabbalah is considered a secret teaching, it holds no secrets. It 
is perceived as secret only by those who are yet unable to create the spiritual 
organs within themselves with which to perceive their surroundings. We are 
the only ones who conceal our surroundings from ourselves in default of the 
corresponding sensory organs. 

The King (Creator, ZA) and Queen (Malchut) must be connected to the souls 
on all sides, Above and below, and be adorned with the souls of the righteous 
(those who wish to merge with the Creator, entrust their souls to Him). And if 
man directs all the intentions of his heart (desires) to this goal and completely 
submits his soul to the Creator’s will, the Creator makes peace and a covenant 
with him (both in the Upper Covenant, called Yesod, and in the lower covenant). 
He blesses Malchut by this peace and covenant, and surrounds her on all sides. 

Unity on all sides means that the souls attain similarity with the Creator 
in all their properties. The righteous are those who want to merge with the 
Creator, attain the entire creation, and as a result, discover the righteousness of 
the Creator, who created and thus governs them. Those who wish to justify all 
the Creator’s actions are called “righteous.” 

Although they have not yet reached this state and are only en route to 
it, even if only at the very beginning of their path, and they are yet to correct 
even a single desire and only feel the smallest aspiration to draw closer to 
the Creator, they are already called “righteous,” after this desire. The Creator 
surrounds Malchut on all sides, and Malchut feels Him with all of her corrected 
properties, sensations. 

Thus, man also receives the name Shalom (peace), for he has made a covenant 
with Malchut below, similar to the covenant of the Sefira Yesod Above. And when 
such a man leaves our world, his soul rises through all the Heavens and none 
stand in its way, and the Creator calls for it and says: “Let Peace come.” The soul 
reveals the thirteen elevations of the holy peach and no one stands in its way. 
Hence, happy is he who makes an offering to the Creator. 

As soon as the soul tears itself from egoism altogether, it completely merges 
with the Creator and is no longer obliged to descend into this world, clothe in a 
physical body, and receive an additional portion of egoistic desires. An offering 
to the Creator signifies rejection of the body’s egoistic desires; it is called a 
“sacrifice,” for our body is no different from that of an animal. 

Therefore, the aspiration to rid oneself of the animate body and its desires 
is called an “offering.” Depending on the kind of desires man is already able 
to wish to rid himself of, his offering takes the form of a bird (one part of his 





The Intention in the Prayer 


471 


desires) or cattle (another part). Certain parts of The Zohar and some of the 
ARI’s compositions discuss this matter in great detail. 

Rabbi Chiya raised his voice: “Oh, Rabbi Shimon, you are alive, and I was 
already mourning over you! Yet, it is not you that I mourn for, but for all my 
friends and for the whole world that will remain orphans after you.” Rabbi 
Shimon is like a torchlight, shining both Above and below. With this Light 
below, he illuminates the whole world. Woe unto this world when this Light will 
leave it and rise up Above. Who will shine in this world with the Light of the 
Torah? Rabbi Aba rose, kissed Rabbi Chiya, and said, “If such words are within 
you, I thank the Creator for sending me to you, so that I could be closer to you. 
How happy I am with my lot!” 

All of the characters described in The Zohar are spiritual objects, Partzufim. As 
does the whole Torah, The Zohar speaks only of things that exist in the spiritual 
worlds, rather than in our world. Therefore, all of the objects, animals, plants, 
and people described in The Book of Zohar constitute spiritual degrees, desires, 
and Partzufim. 

The Creator deliberately sends into our world special souls that are close to 
Him, to help all the others to attain the spiritual in this lifetime, while they are still 
in this world. These great Kabbalists serve as guides for those who have realized 
that they lack spiritual sight, and are hence ready to follow them blindly. 

Rabbi Yehudah said after him: When the Creator told Moshe to choose 
among the people those who are wise and understanding, Moshe looked at the 
people and could not find any. Then he was instructed to pick the heads of the 
tribes who were known for their wisdom. The word “understanding” is not used 
here, for the degree of the understanding is higher than that of the wise. What is 
the difference between one who is wise and one who understands? Wise is one 
who learns from a Ran (Teacher) and wants to attain wisdom. Wise is one who 
knows all that he has to know. 

He who understands consists of several levels-degrees, for he sees into every 
thing and knows for himself and for others. The mark of him who understands 
is formulated in the phrase: “The righteous one knows his animal soul.” The 
righteous one signifies Yesod that passes the Light to Malchut (animal), for the 
Gematria of HaVaYaH of Malchut is fifty-two = BON = BeHeMaH (beast) = Bet- 
Hey-Mem-Hey = 2 + 5 + 40 + 5 = 52. 

Malchut constitutes the level called “wise at heart,” as wisdom is found 
within the heart. But he who understands, sees Above and below, for himself 
and for others. He who is wise designates Malchut, for it is Malchut that reveals 



472 


The Zohar 


wisdom. He who understands is Yesod that stands above Malchut. Ohr Hochma 
in Malchut shines only from below upwards. It is impossible to receive the Light 
from Above downwards, as it would surely enter egoistic desires. Therefore, it 
is said that the wise ( Hacham ) sees only for himself, from himself upwards, and 
cannot pass the Light to others below. 

It is hence said that wisdom is found within the heart, as the heart receives 
from below upwards; whereas he who understands (the Sefira Yesod, Tzadik, 
the righteous one) shines with the Light of Mercy, Ohr Hassadim, from Above 
downwards. He sees that he receives for himself, and shines upon the others, i.e., 
shines upon Malchut, as it is written: “The righteous knows his animal soul.” 



Raising a Prayer 


Here The Zohar speaks about the prayer, which every man offers his Creator 
(Veyikahel, pp. 32-52). This inner action of man constitutes his greatest and most 
valuable work in his efforts for the Creator’s sake. 

The Creator made man at the farthest, completely opposite spiritual level to 
His: with only the egoistic will to enjoy. And since man has no other properties- 
desires but the egoistic will to receive pleasure, not only is he unable to change 
himself, he cannot even wish for the desire to change. 

We can change only under the influence of the Creator’s Light, by receiving 
His properties from Him. Hence our only task is to cultivate a desire to change. 
As soon as this true desire appears within man, the Creator will immediately 
give him the strength needed for its realization. So the problem is not how to 
realize a prayer; it is, rather, how to attain it, how to formulate one’s request for 
the strength to become like the Creator! 

A prayer is a sensation, a desire in one’s heart. Man does not realize 
it completely and cannot describe it, for the sensation in one’s heart is 
not subject to any control and conscious correction —it cannot be “created” by 
one’s own will. The sensations in one’s heart constitute the consequence of 
man’s mental and spiritual condition, the result of the current degree of his 
spiritual development. 

Thus, the desire to change is also in the Creator’s hands. However, He 
gave us the opportunity to stimulate this process and to determine our own 
spiritual advancement: 

- He allows Kabbalists to write books, and when we read them, we 
develop the desire to draw closer to Him; 

- He allows some of the true Kabbalists to be revealed to a wide circle 
of those who desire spiritual development; 


473 




474 


The Zohar 


- Indiscernibly, He transforms our desires (modifies our souls) so we 
suddenly take an interest in spirituality; 

- He changes our desires with regard to this world, helping us realize its 
insignificance and transience through sensations of disappointment 
and suffering. 

By creating man a worthless egoist, i.e., by making a worthless creation that 
is seemingly so unbefitting Him, the Creator allowed man to create himself and 
elevate himself to an equal degree to that of the Creator Himself—to attain His 
level of perfection. Thus, the Creator reveals the perfection of His creation: 
although He created man a worthless creature, He thereby enables him to make 
a “Creator” of himself (in his properties). 

Man cannot claim that although he is created with only one desire, he is 
unable to induce the reception of an altruistic desire instead of his natural, 
egoistic one. The Torah, Kabbalah, teachers, and suffering are all prepared to 
accelerate his advancement toward the goal of creation by the path of the Torah, 
or otherwise, the path of suffering. 

However, the path of suffering is not only undesirable for man, whose life 
on earth makes him feel as though he is caught between the millstones of a 
tirelessly revolving mill. Ruthlessly and methodically, it pulverizes him both 
mentally and physically, to the very last day of his life. But this painful path is 
equally undesirable in the eyes of the Creator. After all, His goal is to delight 
man, which is in accord with the path of the Torah—a quick and painless way to 
transform our desires from egoistic into altruistic. 

Since only the Creator can accomplish this (and He will, either painfully 
or painlessly, in accord with our conscious request), the development of such a 
request toward Him is all that man must do in his life. It is hence written: “Let 
him pray all day long!” Yet, we now understand that this phrase does not speak 
of sitting over a prayer-book, but refers to man’s inner work on himself. 

There are various forms of work that man must do in action, with his body, 
as in the case of physically observing the Mifcjvot. And then there is man’s inner, 
most important work, when observance of the Mitzvot depends on the words 
and desires of the heart. 

Never does Kabbalah allude to or even mention our physical body, for it 
is no different from the body of an animal—it is born, functions, and dies as 
an animal. And all the various forms of work that the body performs are mere 
mechanical actions utterly unconnected to man’s inner intention, and can even 
be outright opposite to it. 




Raising a Prayer 


475 


Therefore, the body’s actions are completely disregarded in Kabbalah. 
Instead, man’s desire is taken into account and is regarded as an action. In itself, 
when stripped off the physical body (in which it presently exists), it constitutes 
man’s inner spiritual action. 

The spiritual world is a world of incorporeal desires that have no volume, 
size, movement, or time. Just as in our imagination, where our desires are 
fulfilled instantly by the power of thought, everything in the spiritual world is 
determined only by our desires-thoughts, and not by physical actions. 

Nevertheless, since in this world we temporarily exist in a physiological body, 
our task is to observe the Creator’s Mitzvot both physically (with our body) and 
spiritually. Physically, we can observe them, as a person usually does—because 
of his upbringing or for a reward in this world (money, health, luck, peace, and 
so forth) or in the world to come (the best that he can imagine). Alternatively, 
he performs these actions because he was taught from childhood to do so 
mechanically, so he cannot avoid doing them in view of the acquired desire 
(instinct)—if he does not do them, he suffers. 

This feeling of suffering is exactly what compels him to carry out the 
mechanical actions of the Mitzvot. It is not even the desire to receive a reward 
in this world or in the world to come: in this case, the reward is instantaneous- 
man feels no discomfort, since he does what he is accustomed to do. 

Hence, it seems to such a man, who observes the Mitzvot because of the 
acquired nature (habit), that he demands no reward for his actions either in 
this world or in the world to come. After all, he truly does not think about any 
reward, as his habit, which became his second nature, compels him to perform 
these actions. If he feels this way, he is absolutely positive that he acts “for the 
Creator’s sake.” The fact that his habit, his second nature, compels him to 
perform the Mitzvot mechanically, escapes his awareness. 

However, since our body is no more than an animal, the mechanical 
fulfillment of the Mitzvot by force of habit or for a reward is quite sufficient for 
him. There is a difference between those who observe because of upbringing or 
habit, and those who do it for a reward: the former do not even care whether 
or not the Creator actually exists; they perform purely mechanical actions that 
they cannot help performing, for they immediately begin to suffer for lack of 
habitual actions. 

Yet, one who observes the Mitzvot because he has faith in reward and 
punishment believes in the Creator, His Torah, and His governance, but simply 



476 


The Zohar 


uses it for his own benefit. By observing the Mitzvot with such an intention 
and remaining in it all of his life, he, naturally, does not grow spiritually. And 
he who does not grow in our world is called “still” (inanimate), as we divide all 
nature into the following levels: still, vegetative, animate, and speaking (human). 
Therefore, such people are regarded as spiritually still (Domem de Kedusha), but 
they are already “spiritually” still, as opposed to those who observe mechanically, 
by force of habit. 

In Kabbalah, the word “body” implies desire. A desire or a body can be 
egoistic or spiritual (altruistic). The gradual passing of the egoistic body and its 
replacement with the altruistic one is called man’s “spiritual birth.” 

Man’s spiritual growth is designated by an increasingly growing intention 
to observe the Mitzvot only because such is the Creator’s desire. Man observes 
it only for His sake, completely selflessly, as if no reward of any kind will ever 
be given to him in return, not even in the form of his own self-content. It is 
as though the Creator does not know who fulfills His desire, as though man 
himself is uncertain of whether or not he observes the Mitzvot. Yet, he does it 
anyway, for such is the Creator’s will. 

So then, the notion of “body” in Kabbalah alludes to man’s corrected 
desires, whereas uncorrected desires, without a screen, cannot be used. It is as 
though they are not considered body parts, existing beyond the body. Hence, 
they are considered foreign forces or desires —Klipot (shells). 

The only existing creation besides the Creator is the egoistic will to enjoy 
Him that was created by Him. This desire can be either egoistic (corrupted) or 
altruistic (corrected), spiritually pure or impure. All the spiritual forces: angels, 
Klipot, etc., constitute our uncorrected or corrected desires (the will to bestow 
delight upon the Creator). Nothing else exists in the universe! 

There are twelve parts in the spiritual body that perform spiritual actions: 
two arms and two legs, each consisting of three parts, in all 4 x 3 = 12. These 
parts of our spiritual body (our desires that were corrected by the screen) observe 
the positive Mit^vot. 

Just like the body of a spiritual object ( Partzuf ), man’s body is his altruistic 
desires, in which he can receive the Creator’s Light according to his intentions 
(screen). Man’s desires are determined by his intentions. 

All the work with the intention “for the Creator’s sake” is performed by 
the external body parts: the twelve parts of arms and legs, and by the twelve 
internal body parts: brain, heart, liver, mouth, tongue, five parts of the lungs, 




Raising a Prayer 


477 


and two kidneys. These inner corrections of the body are meant for reception of 
the Supernal spirit, Light, inside the body, and represent man’s most important 
work with regard to the Creator. 

These inner actions are called Mitzvot. They depend on speech, such as a 
prayer—supplications, blessings, and praises. And he who comes to know this 
work is happy in all things. Man does not realize that his prayer permeates all 
the Heavens, rising up to the very pinnacle of the universe and reaching the 
Creator Himself. 

As was repeatedly mentioned, not a single word in the Torah speaks of our 
world, especially not of our body. All the words in the Torah are the Creator’s 
sacred names—the various sensations of the Creator felt by those who attain 
Him. As we have explained, the attainment and sensation of the Creator is 
impossible without a screen, an altruistic intention, meaning that all that man 
desires is to please his Creator. Only the sensations in the heart (the essence of 
man) can perform this work, and never the physiological organs of our animate 
body, which is no different from that of an animal. 

When the morning Light begins to shine, separating Light from darkness, 
a call pierces through all the Heavens: prepare for the opening of entrances and 
chambers, and each go to your position. For the ones that serve at night are not the 
ones that serve in the daytime. And when the night comes, the daytime servants 
are once more replaced by the nighttime ones. 

When the morning Light begins to shine—when man begins to realize that 
his egoistic desires are death and darkness, whereas altruism and spirituality are 
life and Light, the Light within man thereby separates from darkness, and he 
begins to analyze and realize his states, to feel spiritual ascents and descents—he 
feels his proximity to the Creator as Light, while remoteness from Him and 
descents into his egoistic desires feel like darkness. 

However, one can feel it only if he feels the Creator (even if only a little, 
even if indistinctly). To start feeling the shame of receiving from the Creator and 
the insignificance of one’s nature (the sensation of darkness), one must first feel 
the Creator. Only His Light contains all that man needs: strength for correction, 
desires, life. Hence, the main thing to which man must aspire is the sensation of 
the Creator, but not for pleasure, for correction. 

The forces that serve in the daytime are called the “rulers, the government of 
the day,” and the forces that serve at night are called the “rulers, the government 
of the night.” As soon as the morning call is heard, they all take their positions, 




478 


The Zohar 


Malchut and Israel descend and enter the Beit-Knesset (the House of Assembly— 
a place, where all of man’s wishes are collected; hence, it is called the house of 
prayer) to exalt the Creator and begin their singing and blessings. 

It is written: “We shall praise Your mercy in the morning and Your faith at 
night.” Feeling the Creator’s Light descending upon him, man perceives it as 
morning that comes after the darkness, and upon feeling such a state, he praises 
the Creator in his heart. All alien thoughts retreat before the influence of the 
Creator’s Light, and all impure desires become restrained. 

After man has corrected himself in the positive Mitzvot (in the first part, 
in the corrections of Tzitzit and Tefillin), he must unite all of his heart’s desires 
in inner work (in the second part), and wholeheartedly dedicate himself to the 
work of praises, since speech rises upwards. 

It is impossible to offer a brief explanation of the Mit^vot of Tefillin and 
Tzitzit, observed only by those who spiritually attained the level of Partzuf ZA. 

These servants, who stood in their places in the air, are appointed to rule 
over the four sides of the world. Gazaria soars in the air to govern the East, and 
all the others that are appointed are together with him, and await the words of 
the prayer that rises on that side from below. And this ruler takes the prayer. 

If the words of a prayer are proper, then all these rulers absorb them and 
rise with them to the firmament, where the other rulers stand. Upon absorbing 
these words, they proclaim, “Blessed be Israel. Blessed be the lips that utter 
these words!” 

The letters that were hanging in the air then fly up and form the holy 
name that rules in the air and consists of twelve letters. This is the name by 
which Eliyahu flew before rising up to the sky. The letters fly up in the air, 
and the ruler, who holds the keys to the air in his hand, rises to Heaven along 
with all the other rulers, and pass the letters into the hands of another ruler 
for further ascent. 

After Malchut had been separated from ZA, ZA filled himself with only Ohr 
Hassadim and became the right line, whereas Malchut formed the left line. These 
two lines are in conflict with one another, just as the right and the left lines of 
Bina oppose one another. This continues until ZA ascends to Bina as the middle 
line, balances the right and the left lines, and makes peace between them by 
uniting them in a single, middle line. 

Similarly, ZA and Malchut, the two opposite lines, need a middle line to 
balance them, to bring them balance and peace, and to unite them. This occurs 



Raising a Prayer 


479 


with the help of MAN (Mei Nukvin), the prayers of the righteous, for they offer 
up the desires from this world. Also, the screen that they raise is called the 
Masach (screen) de (of) Hirik— the middle line—causing the left and the right lines 
to unite, and Malchut to unite with ZA. 

Thus, a prayer becomes a request, MAN, and the middle line that leads to 
peace and unity between ZA and Malchut. Just like Yesod Above (the middle line) 
unites the Creator with the Shechina-Malchut by gathering all the created souls, 
man’s prayer creates the middle line and unites all by its ascent—bringing peace 
and unity between the Creator and the Shechina (His creatures), the unity of 
souls with their Creator. 

Hence, just like the Sefira Yesod Above, man, too, is called Shalom (peace). 
Moreover, the world below precedes and determines the world Above, for the 
awakening from below (requests of the lower ones) precedes and evokes the 
awakening from Above. 

The spiritual world is a world of desires. There are only two desires: 

1. The Creator’s desire to bestow perfect delight upon His creation, i.e., 
upon man; 

2. The will to receive pleasure for oneself, created by the Creator, called 
creation, or man’s essence. 

Nothing else exists except for these two desires! Everything we can possibly 
imagine derives only from these two spiritual forces. Man’s desire is called a 
“prayer,” for intentionally or unintentionally, this desire appeals to the One 
who created man, to the Creator. Spiritually, man develops in accordance 
with his prayer. 

However, one’s true prayer is his request for spiritual correction and elevation. 
Such a prayer, a desire in the heart, can be achieved only by consistent study 
of Kabbalistic sources, which affect man’s egoistic desire with their concealed 
inner Light, and evoke him to ascend spiritually (“Introduction to The Study of 
Ten Sefirot,” item 155). 

A soul is none other than man’s corrected, altruistic desire, his spiritual 
Partzuf, his desire to receive the Creator’s Light with the screen (intention) “for 
the Creator’s sake.” 

Man’s speech in a prayer is none other than parts of his soul (the soul itself) 
clothed in a body. A prayer is man’s soul in this world, VAK de Nefesh of Malchut 
de Malchut within Malchut de Assiya. 



480 


The Zohar 


World of AK 
World of Atzilut 
World of Beria 
World of Yetzira 
World of Assiya: Keter 

Hochma 

Bina 

ZA 

Malchut = K + H + B + ZA+M 

K + H + B + ZA+M 

GAR + VAK = Soul of Man 

Yet, how can one’s prayer, his desire, rise through all the degrees of all 
the worlds of BYA and reach Malchut de Atzilut so as to become MAN and the 
middle line, uniting Malchut with ZA? After all, it is well known that no degree 
can rise above itself, let alone make such an incredible leap from the lowest 
degree of the spiritual ladder (our world) to the world of Atzilut. 

To understand that, we must first thoroughly understand the meaning of 
Malchut’s ascent to Bina. As a result of this ascent, each degree splits into two 
parts: Keter and Hochma of each degree remain within it, while Bina, ZA, and 
Malchut fall to a lower degree. This occurs because Malchut ascended to Bina and 
thereby created in Bina a new Sof (end) of the degree. This is because Malchut 
exists under the prohibition of the first restriction, and hence cannot receive the 
Light. Due to the second restriction, Bina, ZA, and Malchut are located below 
the new Sof of the degree. Thus, being below Malchut that ascended to Bina, they 
are defined as a lower degree. 


Keter = Galgalta 

> Together they are called GE (Galgalta-Eynaim) 

Hochma = Eynaim 

Bina =Awzen 

1 Together they are called AHP (Awzen-Hotem-Peh) 

ZA = Hotem 

Malchut = Peh 










Raising a Prayer 


481 


Afterward, through the MAN raised by the lower ones, the Light AB-SAG 
descends and gives strength to Malchut, which stands in Bina, to descend to her 
own place: Malchut descends from Bina to her own place, thereby returning all 
the Sefirot to their places and uniting them all into one degree, consisting of 
ten whole Sefirot. Consequently, Bina and ZON, which were below each degree, 
return to their degree, to their previous level. Thus, each degree restores itself 
back to ten Sefirot. 

However, although Malchut, who stood in Bina as the new Sof (end) of the 
degree, returns from Bina to her own place at the end of every ten Sefirot, this 
new Sof that she created in Bina does not entirely vanish from Bina. As a result, 
Bina and ZON do not descend to their place. Instead, they must rise above the 
new Sof and there create the left line with regard to Keter and Hochma, which 
never fell from their degree and constitute the right line. 

This is why the new Sof remains in its place in all the degrees even after 
Malchut’s descent from Bina. And this Sof is called the “firmament,” while Bina 
and ZON, which fell from their degree, but now have returned to it, are called 
“air.” For each lower degree is defined as VAK (called Avir—a i r) with regard to 
the Upper One. 


Keter = Galgalta 


Hochma = Eynaim 


Bina 


: Awzen 




GE 

■ Parsa (Firmament) - 


ZA 


Hotem 


AHP (Air) 


Malchut = Peh 


Since Bina and ZON fell from their degree, they became as VAK (air) with 
regard to it, as the entire lower degree with regard to the Upper. And after 
the descent of Malchut from Bina, the air (Bina and ZON) that was under the 
firmament rises above it and becomes the left line. 

When Bina and ZON ascend above the firmament, they take with them 
the lower degree, where they existed when they were below, and elevate it along 
with them above the firmament. It is so because unlike our world, there are no 
ascents and descents in the spiritual; a descent constitutes the deterioration of 
one’s properties from one spiritual level to a lower one. 









482 


The Zohar 


Hence, being equivalent in properties with the lower degree, when Bina and 
ZON ascend together, they take the entire lower degree along with them. For 
after being together once, and having become similar, they receive help, ascend, 
and never part again. 

Ultimately, Malchut’s ascent to Bina forms an entrance, an opening, a gate 
for the lower degree, through which it can ascend to the Upper One. Hence, 
when Malchut descends from Bina, thus allowing the lower part, AHP de Bina, to 
ascend, the lower degree can rise along with the ascending AHP de Bina. 


K 


GE of the Upper One 

Firmament 


B 


The entire 

level ZA K 
ascends - 


M 


H 


AHP of the Upper One (Air) 
& GE of the Lower One 

Land or Earth of the Upper One 


ZA ) AHP of the Lower One 


M 


Thus, as a result of Malchut’s ascent to Bina and her subsequent descent due 
to the influence of Ohr A/3-SAG, three parts were formed in each degree: 

- Air, Bina and ZON that fell down; 

- The firmaments, the new ends of degrees that appeared through 
Malchut’s ascent to Bina. These never disappear, even if Malchut 
returns to her place; 

- The entrances for the lower degrees that were formed through 
Malchut’s ascent to Bina, when the lower degree ascends along with 
her. Without it, the lower degree can never reach the Upper One, for 
no degree can ascend above itself. 

This process is described in the Chassidic tales as the mission of a righteous 
one (the Upper Degree) in our world: to descend to the most vile and corrupt 
people (the lower degree). In other words, while essentially remaining itself, 
the Upper Degree should corrupt its properties so as to equalize with the lower 


















Raising a Prayer 


483 


degree. Thus, it shows to the lower ones that in its desires, thoughts, and actions, 
it is the same as them. 

Then, when he completely unites with them, and they fully trust him, when 
he becomes “one of them” (designating the union of AHP of the Upper One 
with GE of the lower one), he gradually, inconspicuously or openly, begins to 
correct them—by his own example, he propagates his thoughts to them. These 
thoughts cannot be perceived from an outsider, but only from “one of their 
own.” That is, the Upper One receives additional Light (strength) in its GE so 
as to be able to raise its own AHP, correct its desires of reception, start working 
with them for the Creator’s sake, and elevate them to its own level. 

And since there is no distinction between the desires of AHP of the Upper 
One and GE of the lower one, into which AHP of the Upper One fell, they both 
rise together. This way, the Upper One elevates, i.e., improves, corrects a certain 
part of the lower one’s properties (GE), and elevates them to its true level. 

Therefore, the most important thing in our state is to come to feel AHP of 
the Upper Degree, located at the very center of our heart, and to become equal 
with it in our properties so as to afterwards rise together with it. 

This process is described in the book Attaining the Worlds Beyond, which 
provides a more personal perspective of this spiritual process: 

Inside the internal sensations of the Kabbalist exists a part of the Higher 
Level, of the future state (AHP). One who perceives a Higher Spiritual Level as 
an unattractive vacuum, rather than a state full of Light, does not receive from 
the Higher level. 

Even though the Higher Level is full of Light, the lower level perceives the 
Higher only to the degree that the lower qualities permit one to do so. Since the 
present qualities are not sufficient to receive the Higher Light, the individual 
does not perceive it. 

We can perceive the Upper Level because all the spiritual steps are arranged 
sequentially from lowest to highest. Moreover, the subsequent states overlap 
with one another; the lower half of the Higher state is situated within the Upper 
half of the lower state (AHP of Upper falls into GE of lower). 

Thus, the lowest part of our Upper State is always present within us, but is 
usually not felt by us. The Upper State above us is referred to as “the Creator” 
because it functions as the Creator for us. 

It gives birth to us and it gives us life and guidance. Since we do not have a 
perception of this Higher State, we often insist that the Creator does not exist. 





484 


The Zohar 


But if we are in a state in which we clearly see the Creator’s Upper 
Domain over all the creations in this world, then we lose the possibility to 
choose freely . 

We can see only One Truth, only One Force, and only One Will that 
operates in everything and in everyone. 

Since the Will of the Creator is to grant each human being a free will, then 
the concealment of the Creator from His creations is necessary. Only if He is 
hidden can we argue that we can aspire of our free will to attach ourselves to the 
Creator—to act for His sake, without any trace of self-interest. 

The entire process of self-correction is possible only when the Creator is 
concealed from us. As soon as He reveals Himself to us we immediately become 
His servants and fall into the control of His thought, grandeur and power. 

At that point, it is impossible to determine what our true thoughts are. 
Thus, in order to allow us to act freely, the Creator has to conceal Himself. 

On the other hand, to give us a chance to break free from the blind slavery 
of egoism, the Creator must reveal Himself. This is so because a human being 
obeys only two forces in this world: the force of egoism—the body—and the force 
of the Creator—altruism. 

It follows, then, that alternating the two states is necessary. These states are 
the concealment of the Creator from us when we perceive only ourselves and 
the egoistic forces governing us, and the revelation of the Creator when we feel 
the power of the spiritual forces. 

In order for one who is still under the influence of egoism to perceive the 
closest Upper Object (the Creator), the Creator must equalize some of His 
qualities with those of the lower being—the person seeking a connection with 
the Creator. 

He will endow some of His altruistic qualities with egoistic attributes, and 
can then come into balance with the person seeking connection with Him. 

The Upper Part elevates the Malchut-Midat HaDin to the level of His Galgalta 
ve Eynaim. As a result, His AHP acquires egoistic qualities. In this manner, His 
AHP “descends” to the lower part (the spiritual level of the seeker) and comes 
into a state of equivalence with the qualities of the lower part. 

Initially the lower part was not able to perceive the Upper Spiritual State. 
However, because the Creator hid His highest altruistic qualities behind egoistic 
ones, He was able to descend to the level of the person so that the person was 
able to perceive Him. 



Raising a Prayer 


485 


Because we perceive higher qualities as being egoistic, we are unable to truly 
grasp their essence. It appears that there is nothing positive in the spiritual that 
may bring pleasure, inspiration, confidence, or tranquility. 

It is precisely at this point that we have an opportunity to exercise our 
willpower. We may, instead, declare that the absence of pleasure and taste in the 
spiritual and in Kabbalah is because of the Creator’s deliberate concealment for 
our own sake. Because we do not yet possess the necessary spiritual qualities, it 
is therefore impossible for us to perceive the Upper spiritual pleasures; rather, 
all our earthly desires are governed by egoism. 

It is crucial for beginners to understand that they are given depression 
and distress in order to overcome them. 

They may direct their pleas for relief to the Creator, they may study, or they 
may do good deeds. The fact that such people do not experience pleasure or 
vitality from spiritual aspirations is directed from Above. 

This gives them the free will to conclude that their lack of pleasure comes 
from a lack of appropriate altruistic qualities in themselves. Hence, the Upper 
One must hide His true qualities from them. 

Therefore, we must remember that the first stage of perceiving the spiritual 
is the feeling of spiritual deprivation. If the lower part is capable of realizing that 
the Upper One is concealing Himself because of their incongruity of qualities, 
and if that lower part asks for help to correct its own egoism by raising a prayer 
(MAN), then the Upper Part partially reveals Himself (lifts His AHP) and displays 
His true qualities, which prior to this moment, were disguised beneath egoism. 

As a result, spiritual pleasure also becomes apparent. Thus, the lower part 
begins to experience the grandeur and the spiritual pleasure felt by the Higher 
Being, Who possesses spiritual altruistic qualities. 

Because the Upper Part elevated His altruistic qualities in the eyes of the 
individual, He thus elevated the individual to the middle of His State (He lifted 
GE of the lower together with His own AHP). 

This spiritual state is known as a person’s “lesser spiritual level” (Katnut). 
The Upper Part, in a way, elevates the lower part to His own spiritual level by 
revealing both His grandeur and the grandeur of altruistic qualities. By seeing 
the magnificence of the spiritual and comparing it to the material, we may 
spiritually rise above our world. 

When we perceive the spiritual, regardless of our will, our egoistic qualities 
are changed into altruistic ones, that is, into the qualities of the Creator. In 



486 


The Zohar 


order to allow the lower part to take complete possession of the Higher first 
level, the Upper Part wholly reveals Himself and all His qualities to that lower 
part; meaning He reveals his Grandeur, makes Gadlut. 

At this point, the person perceives the Upper Part as the One and Only 
Absolute Sovereign of everything in the universe. At the same time, the lower 
part grasps the highest knowledge of the purpose of creation and of the 
Upper’s dominion. 

It becomes clear to the lower part that there is no other way to conduct 
oneself than in the way prescribed by Kabbalah. Thus, the lower part’s reason 
now requires proper action. As a result of this clear awareness of the Creator, 
one must deal with the contradiction between faith and knowledge, between 
the right and the left lines. 

Now, having acquired altruistic qualities (Katnut), the lower part prefers to 
proceed only by means of faith in the strength of the Creator. This serves as an 
indication of the seeker’s sincere desire to come closer to the Creator. 

However, the Creator’s revelation of His grandeur ( Gadlut ) now obstructs 
one from advancing by faith. Consequently, the individual must willingly 
dispense with the acquired knowledge. 

When one pleads to proceed blindly, relying only on one’s faith in the 
magnificence of the Creator, rather than by realizing His power and grandeur, 
and only by using reason in proportion to one’s faith, the Creator is compelled 
to limit His disclosure. When such an action compels the Creator to diminish 
His disclosure of His general dominion, His omnipotence, and His Light (O hr 
Hochma), this is called “the screen of Hiril c.” 

Through this screen, we are able to diminish the revelation of the Upper 
reason (the left line) to the point at which this revelation can be balanced with 
faith, the right line. The correct correlation between faith and knowledge is 
called a “spiritual balance,” or the middle line. 

We, as individuals, determine the state we desire to be in. Once the correct 
correlation of faith and knowledge is in place, we can then attain perfection. 
This is known as “the middle line.” 

The part of revealed knowledge (the left line) that we can use in proportion to 
our faith (the right line), by proceeding by faith above reason (the middle line), is 
added onto those spiritual qualities that we possessed before, in the state of Katnut. 
The newly acquired spiritual level is known as Gadlut, meaning big and complete. 



Raising a Prayer 


487 


After the first complete spiritual level has been attained, we will become 
equal in qualities to the very first (the lowest) state of the spiritual ladder. As was 
mentioned earlier, all the states, or steps of the ladder, overlap with each other. 

Having reached the first level, we may discover the presence of a higher 
level within us. Using the same principle as when advancing to the first level, we 
can proceed step by step to the goal of creation—complete unification with the 
Creator on the Highest level. 

An essential part of our spiritual ascent is a special process that requires 
that, on discovering a greater evil within us, we ask the Creator to grant us the 
strength to overcome that evil. We then receive strength in the form of a greater 
spiritual Light. 

This continues until we actually reach the original level and size of our 
souls: at that point, our egoism is completely corrected and filled with Light. 

When we are distracted by outside thoughts, we feel that thoughts obstruct 
us from ascertaining the spiritual, because our strength and minds are wasted on 
extraneous concerns, while our hearts become filled with petty desires. At times 
like this, we lose faith in the fact that only the Kabbalah contains the true life. 

Once we overcome this condition, we come out of our state and move into 
the Light, receiving a Higher Light that helps us ascend further. In this manner, 
our extraneous thoughts work to help us in our spiritual advancement. 

We can overcome obstacles only with the help of the Creator. We can only 
work on something if we perceive some personal benefit in the task. However, 
our bodies, hearts and intellects do not understand what benefits can result 
from altruism. 

Therefore, as soon as we try to make even the slightest altruistic move, we lose 
all strength of the mind, heart and body. We are left with nothing else but to turn 
to the Creator and ask Him for help. In this way, unwillingly and without any free 
choice, we advance toward the Creator until we merge with Him completely. 

The lower half of the Higher spiritual object is found within the Upper half 
of the lower spiritual object. In the lower object, the screen (M asach) is found in 
the eye area. This is known as “spiritual blindness,” because in such a state only 
the lower half of the Higher object is visible to us, since the screen of the lower 
spiritual object conceals part of the Higher spiritual object. 

The Higher spiritual object drops its screen to the lower one, then reveals itself 
to the lower object, which in turn begins to view the Higher object as the Higher 
One views itself. As a result, the lower object receives the state of fullness ( Gadlut ). 



488 


The Zohar 


The lower object, then, sees that the Higher One is in a “great” state, and realizes 
that the Higher object’s prior concealment and apparent manifestation as the 
“small” state (Katnut), was done exclusively for the benefit of the lower one. In this 
way, the lower object could become aware of the importance of the Higher One. 

A person in the right line (Kav Yamin) is happy with his lot ( Chafetz Hesed). 
This is called a “small spiritual state” (Katnut), because a person feels no need 
for the Torah. He does not feel evil, egoism within himself, and without the 
need for self-correction, he needs no Torah. 

Hence, he needs the left line (Kav Smol). He has to critically appraise his state 
(Heshbon Nefesh), decide what he wants from the Creator and from himself, and 
whether he understands the Torah and advances toward the goal of creation. 
Here he sees his genuine state and is obliged to integrate it in the right line. In 
other words, he has to be content with what he has and be pleased with his state, 
as if he has everything that he wishes. 

In the left line, which brings about suffering as a result of the absence of 
the desired, a need is awakened for the help of the Creator, which comes in the 
form of Light of the soul. 

In the right line, in a state when a person desires nothing for the self, there 
exists only the Light of Mercy (Ohr Hassadim), the joy from the similarity in 
spiritual qualities. But this state is not perfect, because it lacks knowledge and 
the understanding of the inner meaning. In the left line there is no perfection 
because the Light of Wisdom can illuminate only if there is congruence in 
qualities between the Light received and the recipient of the Light. 

The congruence results in Ohr Hassadim, which is found in the right line. 
Spiritual gains can be made only by having a desire. But the right line has no 
desire for anything. All the desires are concentrated in the left line. However, 
the desired cannot be received into the egoistic desires. 

Thus, it is necessary to unite these two qualities so that the Light of 
knowledge and pleasure of the left line can enter the Light of altruistic qualities 
of the right line, and the Light of the middle line will illuminate the created 
being. Without the Light of the right line, the Light of the left is not revealed 
and is perceived only as darkness. 

The ascent from our world, in which we do not consciously perceive AHP 
of the Upper One, occurs in the following way: 

All of one’s thoughts about the Creator and spirituality constitute his 
contact with AHP of the Upper One. How can this Upper Partzuf descend to 



Raising a Prayer 


489 


him? Only by equalizing one’s desires (properties) with it. All of man’s thoughts 
and desires (or lack thereof), with regard to the spiritual, constitute his contact 
with the Upper One. When man feels a lack of desire for spirituality, it means 
that the Upper Partzuf descended and entered him, equalized itself with him; 
hence, man feels spiritual emptiness. 

It is precisely in this state of not being drawn to the spiritual that man 
should tell himself that it only seems to him this way, whereas in truth, by faith 
above reason, he desires and acts for the sake of nearing the spiritual. In other 
words, if, in the state when the Upper One “falls” (spiritual values lose their 
significance) in his eyes, one can nonetheless aspire to spirituality, he thereby 
binds, connects himself to AHP of the Upper One. This is because AHP of the 
Upper One deliberately degraded its properties and assumed an outward form 
similar to the properties (desires) of man. 

Therefore, as soon as one can establish contact with AHP of the Upper One 
(even if it appears to him absolutely unattractive, precisely because it lowers its 
properties to man’s level), this AHP of the Upper One immediately elevates 
man to its GE. Thus, man ascends to a Higher Degree. 

“Piercing through the air” means that the air boundary, consisting of Bina 
and ZON of the Upper Degree, created as a result of Malchut’s ascent to Bina, is 
pierced by Malchut’s descent from Bina to her place, for then the air rises above 
the firmament and reaches GAR (GE) of the degree. 

Thus occurs the piercing of the firmaments. For the firmaments constitute 
the borders of new ends, which appeared because the air (Bina and ZON) was 
pushed off from its own degree to a lower one, and was not allowed to return 
to its degree. Hence, the firmament is pierced from Malchut’s descent, and no 
longer prevents Bina and ZON from ascending and joining that degree. 


K 

H 

B 

ZA 

M 


GE of the Upper one 

--Firmament 


K AHP of Upper one (Air) + GE of Lower one 
H 

V ' 

ZA AHP of of the Lower one 

M 













490 


The Zohar 


1. Malchut ascended to Bina = firmament. 

2. Malchut descends back. This creates a passage for AHP to its GE. Thus, 
the entrances for the lower degree are opened: due to Malchut’s descent to her 
place and the piercing through the firmaments, Bina and ZON ascend to a 
Higher Degree above the firmament together with the lower degree that they 
were with during their descent. 

In other words, the Upper One deliberately opened up the entrances to 
enable the lower degree to ascend to a Higher Degree, and not for Bina and 
ZON (AHP of the Upper One), who simply return to their place. 

The Light that lowers Malchut from Bina to her own place at the end of the 
ten Sefirot stems from Partzufim AB-SAG. These are the Partzufim Hochma and 
Bina of the world of AK. Although the second restriction— Malchut’s ascent to 
Bina— occurred in Partzuf Bina of the world of AK, the Partzufim Bina (SAG) and 
Hochma (AB) of the world of AK were unaffected by it, and Malchut remains in 
her place at the end of the ten Sefirot. 

Only the Creator Himself, meaning the properties of the Light, can correct 
and transform man’s egoistic properties to altruistic. Indeed, man is simply 
unable to pull himself out of his current state “by his own hair,” as from birth 
he has absolutely no spiritual strength (desires). Hence, only the Upper Light 
can correct him. And it can only be Ohr Hochma, for this is the Light that 
the Creator emanates. Ohr Hochma, unrestricted by Tzimtzum Bet, is located in 
Partzuf AB of the world of AK. Partzuf SAG de AK is a Partzuf of Bina. 

Therefore, when one raises his MAN (prayer), it reaches the Highest 
Partzufim of the world of Atzilut, which turn to SAG-Bina-lma (mother), who 
in turn appeals to AB-Hochma-Aba (father), receives Ohr Hochma from him and 
passes it to her children—the souls of the righteous, those who wish to become 
righteous and to ascend spiritually. 

Hence, when Hochma-AB unites with Bina-SAG in the world of AK, this 
Light ( Ohr AB-SAG) descends from Partzuf Bina de AK to Partzuf Bina de Atzilut, 
called EKYEH = Aleph-Hey-Yod-Hey. Partzuf Bina de Atzilut sends the Light to all 
the degrees of the worlds of BYA. Upon attaining a particular Partzuf, this Light 
lowers the Malchut of each degree (that ascended to Bina) from the degree of 
Bina to her previous place. 

Starting with AVI, all the Partzufim are in the state of Katnut: AHP of the 
Upper Partzuf is inside GE of the lower one. The received Ohr Hochma descends 
to him who raised MAN, thus evoking Gadlut in all the Partzufim, through which 




Raising a Prayer 


491 


the Light descends to him. The Light descends to each Partzuf along his personal 
path, which is precisely what connects everyone, each soul, to the Creator. 


World of AK 


Keter - Galgalta 
Hochma -AB 
Bina - SAG 

ZA-MAElyon. 

Malchut - BON Elyon 

World of Atzilut 

Keter - Atik 

Hochma-AA . 

Bina- AVI = EKYEH 


These Partzufim 
channel the Light of 
AB-SAG from 
SAG of AK 

down to AVI de Atzilut 


ZA 


Malchut 


World of Beria 
World of Yetzira 
World of Assiya 
Our World 


This is why the name EKYEH is referred to as the ruler of air that moves the 
boundary of air because of Malchut’s descent from Bina to her previous place. 
Each degree and each world consists of four Sefirot H-B-ZA-M, each of which 
Consists of its own individual ten Sefirot, where, as a result of Malchut’s ascent to 
Bina in each degree, Bina-ZA-Malchut of each degree fell to a lower degree. 

Thus, there are four kinds of airspace in each world that are governed by 
the three names of EKYEH: EKYEH in the air of Hesed, EKYEH in the air of 
Gevura, and EKYEH in the air of Tifferet. Malchut receives from them, and all 
three names govern in her air together. 

The triple name, EKYEH, comprises twelve letters. This twelve-letter name 
rules in the air by lowering Malchut from Bina to her previous place, returning 
Bina and ZON (called “air”), who fell to a lower degree, back to the degree above 
the firmament. For Malchut’s ascent to Bina created an entrance, to enable the 









492 


The Zohar 


lower one rise to the Upper Degree as soon as it opens, i.e., during Malchut’s 
return to her place. 

Hence, when the prophet Eliyahu (a particular spiritual degree) wished to 
soar to the sky, Malchut of each degree ascended to Bina of the corresponding 
degree, while Bina and ZON of this degree fell to the lower degree, and a 
firmament was formed between them. It turned out that each degree doubled: 
now it contained its own degree, as well as Bina and ZON of the Upper Degree, 
who fell and clothed the lower degree. 

This occurred at each degree of the worlds of ABYA, down to the lowest 
one: Bina and ZON of the Sefira Malchut of the world of Assiya fell and emerged 
in our world below Malchut. Malchut de Assiya ends at its firmament, which is a 
new end, in Bina. Also, this degree doubled, as Bina and ZON of the Sefira Yesod 
of the world of Assiya fell and clothed in its degree. 


GEde Bina 
of the World of Atzilut 





AHP de Bina 

GEdeZA 





AHPdeZA 

GE de Malchut 


Parsa 

Parsa 


AHP de Malchut 

GE de Keter of the World of Beria 





AHP de Keter 

GE de Hochma 


etc. 


GE de Bina 
of the World of Assiya 


Machsom 

AHP de Bina 

GEdeZA 




AHPdeZA 

GE de Malchut of the World of Assiya 



AHPde Malchut 

(GE) of the Human Soul 
in our World 


In the diagram, GE of man in our world are put in brackets, for he who 
exists (spiritually, not with his body) at the degree of our world has no desires of 
bestowal. Hence, it is said that he who exists with his properties in this world, 
in egoism, has only a point in his heart, from which he can start his spiritual 
development. 

Similarly, the Sefira Yesod of the world of Assiya also ends with its firmament 
and contains Bina and ZON of the Sefira Hod de Assiya. The Sefira Netzah de 
Assiya also doubled, and so on up to Bina de Atzilut. This is why the prophet 
Eliyahu rose up and united with Bina and ZON, who fell from Malchut de Assiya 






































Raising a Prayer 


493 


to this world. He equalized with them and clothed in them, whereupon they 
became like him—reached his degree. 

Not all ten Sefirot of the world of Assiya are shown in the above diagram, 
but as it was previously mentioned, each degree is divided into its own GE and 
AHP. Man’s task is to find AHP of the Upper One within him, and connect to 
it, merge with it in all of his sensations and desires. 

Subsequently, the twelve-letter name exerted its influence (thanks to the 
Light AB-SAG), causing Malchut de Assiya to descend from Bina of Malchut de 
Assiya to its place, Malchut de Malchut, the end of the ten Sefirot. And as before, 
Bina and ZON ascended to their degree above the firmament of Malchut. And 
since Eliyahu’s properties were already merged with this air (with the ascending 
Bina and ZON), he rose together with them above the firmament of Malchut, as 
he was similar to them. 


etc. 


GE de Hochma 
of the World of Assiya 




| Sefira Yesod 
j of the World of Assiya 

AHP 

GE de Bina 



AHP de Bina 

GEdeZA 


| Sefira Malchut 



AHPdeZA 

GE de Malchut 

j of the World of Assiya 




AHP de Malchut |(GE) of the Human Soul in our World 


And since he rose above the firmament of Malchut de Assiya, he entered the 
air (AHP) of Yesod de Assiya, i.e., Bina and ZON of Yesod that fell down there. 
Then he merged in his desires with this air and is considered to have clothed in 
it, for they were previously at the same degree. Then the influence of the twelve- 
letter name lowered Malchut from Bina of Yesod de Assiya to her place at the end 
of the ten individual Sefirot of Yesod de Assiya. 

After that, Bina and ZON (the air of Yesod) ascended above the firmament 
of Yesod. And since Eliyahu had already merged with this air, he (man’s soul, his 
desire) too ascended above the firmament of Yesod de Assiya, due to his concord 
with them. 

And because he rose above the firmament of Yesod de Assiya, he met with 
the air (AHP) of Hod de Assiya, i.e., Bina and ZON of Hod de Assiya that fell down 
there. Subsequently, he merged in his desires with this air and clothed it, for 
they were previously at the same place (spiritually similar to one another). 
























494 


The Zohar 


As soon as man merges in his properties with AHP of the Upper One, the 
influence of the twelve-letter name (the descent of the Light of AB-SAG from 
Above) brings Malchut back (gives strength to the screen) to the end of the ten 
individual Sefirot of Hod de Assiya. And the air, its Bina and ZON, returned to 
their place above the firmament of Hod de Assiya. They took Eliyahu (man’s soul, 
his desires) with them, for he had merged with them, and they elevated him to 
the firmament of Hod de Assiya in view of his similarity with them. 

And when he was already in the firmament of Hod de Assiya, he met with 
the air (AHP) of Netzah de Assiya and merged with it in his properties. When the 
influence of the twelve-letter name (the Light of correction, AB-SAG, that was sent 
by the Creator) brought Malchut back to her place (Malchut descended from Bina 
to Malchut of this Sefira, because she received strength from the Light to resist 
the egoistic desires of AHP and make them altruistic), the air of Netzah ascended 
above the firmament, and being merged with Eliyahu (man’s soul), took him with 
it. Being already in the firmament of Netzah, he met with the air of Tifferet and so 
on, until he ascended with this air above the firmament of Tifferet de Assiya. 

In the same way, the air (AHP) of each degree rose higher, up to the Highest 
Degree of the world of Assiya. From there, it rose to Malchut de Yetzira, and from 
there—one step at a time—along all the degrees of the world of Yetzira and the 
world of Beria, up to the Heavens (ZA) of the world of Atzilut. 

It is therefore said about the prophet Eliyahu that the Creator’s spirit 
(the Light AB-SAG) elevated him (merged with AHP of the Upper One) to the 
Heavens: spirit means Ruach, Sefirot Bina and ZON of the Upper Degree, called 
“air,” that fell down to the lower degree. And this air (spirit) elevates one from 
a lower degree to a Higher One through all the individual degrees, from the 
lowest degree (So/ de Assiya) up to the world of Atzilut. 

An Upper Degree is regarded as the Creator of the lower degree: it creates 
it, vitalizes it with Light, and governs it. At each degree, man considers the next 
Highest spiritual degree with regard to him as the Creator. As Rabbi Zushe said: 
“Every day I have a new Creator.” In other words, as man ascends to a Higher 
Degree (which he calls “day” or “Light”), he thereby reveals a new property of 
the Creator in this Higher Degree. 

The air of each of the four sides of the world (in Sefirot Hesed-Gevura-Tifferet- 
Malchut) has its own rulers, who hold the keys to the activation of the twelve- 
letter name so as to lower Malchut from Bina to her own place. The ascending 
order of these four kinds of air is as follows: West-Malchut, East-Ti//eret (including 
NHY), North-Getwa, and South-Hesed. 



Raising a Prayer 


495 


Hesed - SOUTH 

Gevura - NORTH 

ZA - EAST 

Malchut - WEST 

It is not the rulers that raise a prayer (the desire that man feels in the very 
depths of his heart) from air to air, and then from firmament to firmament. 
The air raises a prayer from the firmament, each air to its firmament: first, the 
prayer ascends to the air of the Sefira Malchut de Assiya, i.e., to Bina and ZON 
(AHP) that fell from Malchut de Assiya down to our world. They resemble the 
prayer itself, for this air (AHP) is similar to a prayer (the Upper One lowered 
itself deliberately to equalize its properties with the lower one); hence, they 
merge as one degree. 

Then the one that rules there, Zvuliel (Zebuliel), activates the twelve-letter 
name, which lowers Malchut from Bina de Assiya to her place. This causes the 
air to return to its degree and rise above the firmament of the world of Assiya. 
And since the air became similar to the degree of the actual prayer, it also takes 
the prayer along with it, raising it above the firmament of the Sefira Malchut de 
Assiya. This is similar to the ascent of Prophet Eliyahu. 

And since the prayer ascended to the firmament of the world of Assiya, it 
meets the air of Yesod de Assiya that fell there, as in the case of Eliyahu. It also 
encounters the ruler of the air of the East, Gazaria (Gazardiel), because East 
designates the Sefira Tifferet (ZA is often called T ifferet, as the properties of this 
Sefira dominate and determine all the properties of ZA), which includes the 
Sefira Yesod, for Tifferet includes Sefirot NHY. 

This ruler activates the twelve-letter name and lowers Malchut from Bina 
de Yesod to her place, which causes the air of Yesod to ascend to its degree, 
the firmament of Yesod. By merging with the prayer into one degree via 
equivalence of form, he takes it with him and raises it above the firmament 
of Yesod. Then, a similar action occurs in the air and firmament of Sefirot 
Netzah, Hod, and Tifferet. 

Since the prayer ascended to the firmament of Tifferet, it encounters the 
Northern air, i.e., Bina and ZON of Gevura de Assiya that fell there. There it 
unites with this air into one degree. Then the ruler of the North, Petachia 
(Petahyah), activates the twelve-letter name and lowers Malchut from Bina to her 
place. Consequently, the air returns, ascends to the firmament of Gevura and 
takes with it the prayer, which merged with it into one degree during its fall. 


496 


The Zohar 


Since the prayer has already reached the firmament of Gevura, it meets with 
the Southern air, Bina and ZON of Hesed de Assiya that fell there, and merges 
with this air. Then the ruler of the Southern air, named Pisgania (Pesagniyah), 
Hesed de Assiya, activates the twelve-letter name and lowers Malchut from Bina of 
Hesed de Assiya to her place. The Southern air returns and ascends to its degree 
in the sixth firmament, Hesed de Assiya, called “south.” 

Since the prayer has reached the sixth firmament, it encounters the air that 
fell from the seventh firmament, which is Bina that includes GAR, and the prayer 
merges with this air into one degree. When the twelve-letter name lowers Malchut 
from Bina (the seventh firmament) to her place, the air returns to its degree (the 
seventh firmament) and takes the prayer with it, as they merge during its fall. 

Since the prayer has reached the seventh firmament, it encounters the air 
that fell from Malchut de Yetzira, and merges with it. Next, the general ruler, 
Sandalphon, who governs the entire world of Assiya, takes it and activates the 
twelve-letter name, which lowers Malchut from Malchut de Yetzira to her place. 
And the air ascends and returns to its degree, the firmament of Malchut de Yetzira, 
takes the prayer with it, and elevates it to the firmament of Malchut de Yetzira. 

In exactly the same way, the prayer ascends through all seven Heichalot 
(halls) of the worlds Yetzira and Beria up to the world of Atzilut. This clarifies 
the question posed in the beginning: how can a prayer ascend from the very 
lowest degree of the world of Assiya to the world of Atzilut, for no degree can 
ascend above itself? From the aforesaid, it follows that since the prayer merges 
with the first air that fell from Malchut de Assiya to our world, it is exactly this 
air that elevated them to the firmament of Malchut, whereas the air of Yesod 
de Assiya was elevated to the firmament of Yesod, and so forth. In other words, 
the air with which the prayer merges and ascends elevates it to Malchut of the 
world of Atzilut. 

He who falls from Malchut de Assiya to our world descends from the spiritual 
degree called Malchut de Assiya to the spiritual degree called our world. Of course, 
this in no way refers to the physical existence in our world. AHP of the Upper 
Degree are considered fallen when one feels in his heart (in the center of all of 
his desires) the desire to attain the spiritual, merge with it, and annul his egoistic 
properties because they harm and impede his advancement. 

One should not think that the fall of Bina and ZON to our world from the 
world of Assiya can be experienced by anyone. And only he who felt this way 
and was then able to make a sufficient amount of quantitative and qualitative 
efforts, merits being elevated above our world by AHP of the Upper One. 



Raising a Prayer 


497 


On the Southern side ( Hesed ), there is he who governs the air of that side, 
and his assistants. His name is Pisgania, and he holds the keys to the air of 
this side. All those who suffer pray to their Creator from the depths of their 
broken hearts (the very sensation of suffering constitutes a prayer, and requires 
no words). If their speech (desires) is worthy, it ascends to the air of this side, 
and the ruler accepts and kisses it (“embrace,” “kiss,” and Zivug are forms of 
spiritual union of Partzufim), and then declares: “The Creator will be merciful 
and will spare you in His mercy.” 

All of the holy rulers (O hr Hochma is called holy) and their assistants of that 
side rise together with him. The letters of the Creator’s holy name, of the twelve- 
letter name EKYEH soar: four letters Aleph-Hey-Yod-Hey on each side, which 
rule the corresponding sides of air. They ascend on this side of the air to the 
Southern firmament, Hesed (the sixth firmament), to the ruler of the firmament 
of the Southern side, named Anafiel. 

On the Northern side (Gevura) there is Petachia, who governs the air with 
his assistants. If he who prays for his enemies and haters, i.e., for those who 
make him suffer is righteous, then as the speech of his prayer rises to the air 
of that side, the ruler accepts his heart’s speech and kisses it (unites it with his 
properties so as to raise it higher). 

The air that comes from the North stirs and calls upon all the firmaments, 
and they all take this speech, raise it to the Northern, fifth firmament, kiss 
it and say: “The Lord will cast your enemies down and take them away from 
your face.” This occurs in the following order: after the governor of the air had 
accepted the prayer and kissed it, which means that it merged with the degree 
of the air and the ruler, the air stirs on the Northern side (the new end that 
Malchut made as she ascended to Bina, called Techum—space, from the word 
Tohu— chaos), and the twelve-letter name lowers Malchut from Bina of Gevura de 
Assiya back to her place. 

The air that fell into the restrictions ( Dinim ) of this space is aroused by 
the desire to rise to the firmament of Gevura. Also, all the degrees that merged 
with it during its fall rise along with it to the firmament of Gevura due to their 
similarity to it. Similarly, the prayer that was merged with it during its fall ascends 
along with it to the fifth firmament. 

The order of the ascent (offering up of a prayer) starts from here: it ascends 
and pierces through the air (AHP), which fell from Malchut de Assiya to our 
world, and ascends with it to the first firmament, the firmament of Malchut de 
Assiya. The prayer ascends and approaches the ruler (in its properties), who was 



498 


The Zohar 


appointed to control the Western side, Malchut. There are nine entrances where 
the assistants to the ruler, Zvuliel stand. 

The ten Sefirot of Malchut herself have nine (not ten) entrances, for a 
restriction to receive the Light is imposed on Malchut of the Sefira Malchut, and 
it is connected to Yesod de Malchut. Hence, Yesod and Malchut of Malchut share 
the same entrance. 

However, a question arises: “Why do all the parts of the air have one ruler for 
the air and a separate ruler for the firmament? For example, on the Eastern side 
Gazaria controls the Eastern air and Shimshiel controls the Eastern firmament 
(T ifferet, the fourth firmament). Similarly, Pisgania controls the Southern air on 
the Southern side, and Anafiel controls the Southern firmament. And on the 
Northern side, the ruler Petachia governs the Northern air, and Gadriel is in 
charge of the Northern firmament. So why does only Malchut have one general 
ruler, called Zvuliel, who governs both the air and the firmament?” 

The reason is that due to Malchut’s ascent to Bina, Bina and ZON of each 
degree fall to a lower degree, the degree of air. However, only the lower part of 
Bina (ZAT or VAK de Bina ) falls, whereas Keter, Hochma, and the Upper half of 
Bina (GAR de Bina ) remain at the same degree. Only the lower half of Bina, ZAT 
de Bina (ZA and Malchut) fell from this degree and became air. 



Therefore, two separate rulers were needed: one for the Upper Degree 
remaining above the firmament, and the other—for the lower half of the degree 
that fell and turned into air. The degree (ten Sefirot) of Malchut, from whom 
all nine lower Sefirot fell to the lower degree during Malchut’s ascent to Bina, 
retained only one Sefira Keter de Malchut, which remained as a point below 
Yesod de ZA. 

Nevertheless, even this point refers more to the Sefira Yesod, which is superior 
to Malchut, because its properties are more similar to Yesod. And since all of 









Raising a Prayer 


499 


Malchut refers to the properties of air (except for her individual Keter), she has 
only one ruler. 

The ruler wishes to act in the firmament in the daylight, but does not 
receive permission until the moon rises, i.e., until nightfall, when all the rulers 
and forces emerge. And when the day breaks (the Upper Light starts shining), 
they all ascend (the spiritual properties become corrected and improve under 
the Light’s influence) to the Highest of the nine entrances, the point of Keter de 
Malchut, which remained at its degree above the firmament ( Parsa ). 

And when the prayer ascends, it enters through this Upper entrance, and all 
the rulers with their assistants emerge from it, led by their Supreme ruler, Zvuliel, 
the only ruler of the air of this Upper entrance, who is above the firmament of 
Malchut de Assiya. They all emerge, kiss the prayer, and accompany it up the 
second firmament of Yesod de Assiya. 

Malchut constitutes the left line— Hochma without Hassadim. Therefore, when 
she dominates, the Light does not shine and darkness prevails. Hochma cannot 
shine without Hassadim, which means that when Malchut rules, it is nighttime 
(not daylight). Indeed, all nine of her lower Sefirot, from which all the rulers (of 
man) and forces (man’s desires) of the left side originate, rule at night. 

This is why it is said that Malchut descends from Bina to her place, although 
her nine lower Sefirot remained untouched by the impure force, for Malchut 
descended from the firmament, which transformed her into air. Even so, they 
(nine Sefirot) have no power in her place, and must rise above the firmament to the 
Upper entrance, Keter de Malchut. There they enter the right side (Hassadim), and 
the prayer ascends with them because of their similarity (in desires, properties), 
achieved while they were below the firmament (in the state called “our world”). 

And since the prayer (MAN) rose above the firmament of Malchut (to GE 
of the Upper One), it encounters the air (AHP of the still Higher One) that fell 
there from the second firmament. After the descent of Malchut from Bina of 
Yesod de Assiya to her place, this air ascends to the firmament of Yesod, and takes 
with it all the rulers, their assistants, and the prayer, which were merged with it 
during its fall, and elevates all of them to the firmament of Yesod de Assiya. 

And when the prayer ascends to this firmament (Yesod), the twelve gates 
of this firmament open up. A special ruler, Ana’el (Anahel), who is in charge 
of many forces, stands at the twelfth entrance, and when the prayer ascends, 
proclaims to all the entrances: “Open the gates.” And all the entrances open up, 
and the prayer enters through them. 



500 


The Zohar 


This happens because Tifferet has twelve borders of the diagonal, defined 
by the Sefirot H-G-T-M, each of which contains three lines of HGT, twelve in 
all. And all that exists in Tifferet is also present in Yesod, but there these twelve 
borders are called “twelve gates,” through which the prayer enters. 

And then awakens a very old ruler, who stands at the Southern side. His 
name is Azriel-Saba, sometimes referred to as Machaniel, for he is responsible 
for 600,000 groups (camps— Machanot). All the groups have wings and eyes; they 
stand and listen to all those who are quietly praying, to the prayers that come 
from the depths of the heart and are directed only to the Creator. Only such 
prayers are heard by those who have ears. 

There is a special opening in the Sefira Yesod de Hesed (Supernal mercy) that 
descends from the right line of Bina. Hence, the ruler of this mercy is called 
AzriehSaba. He is called Saba (grandfather), because Hochma and Bina are called 
“old men.” And he is appointed to rule over 600,000 groups (camps), because 
600 = 6 x 100, where 6 = HGT NHY Sefirot in Bina. And since each Sefira in Bina 
is designated by 100, 6 x 100 = 600. And the thousands stem from Ohr Hochma, 
which shines in each of these Sefirot. Hence, 600 x 1,000 = 600,000 groups. 

GAR de Tvuna, the lower part (Z AT) of Bina, are called “ears.” Only Ohr 
Hassadim shines in them, without Hochma. VAK de Tvuna are called “eyes,” and 
Ohr Hochma shines in them. 

Malchut and Bina constitute two kinds of air, West and North, which unite 
and intermix, and form a diagonal, a combination of judgment and mercy that 
mitigates strictness and judgment. Hence, they hear good words from one who 
merits it, i.e., they accept one’s prayer to the extent of the mercy in the diagonal. 
Alternatively, they hear bad things about one who does not merit, accepting 
one’s prayer to the extent of the judgment in the diagonal. 

If man’s ears hear the prayer (which means that he speaks not from the 
depths of his heart, but with his mouth, so outwardly that his ears hear it, but 
not his heart), no one will accept it Above. Therefore, man must be watchful: 
no one should hear his prayer, for the speech of the prayer unites in the Upper 
World, in ZA, and the speech of the Upper World must not be heard. 

Consider how the Torah is read: one reads and the others keep silent. 
However, if they all read it out loud, they lessen the faith Above, for the voice and 
speech of one mingle with the voice and speech of the others, and undermine 
faith, i.e., Malchut. The voice and speech (ZA is called “voice” and Malchut is 
called “speech”) of one must be similar to the voice and speech of the other. 



Raising a Prayer 


501 


Two reasons are mentioned above as to why a prayer must be speech without 
voice, unheard by man’s ear. The first is that Malchut, who begets people, consists 
of two points: the Light cannot be received from Malchut with a measure of 
judgment, whereas the Light can be received from Malchut that is corrected in 
Bina with a measure of mercy. 

Similarly, man consists of a combination of these two points. If he merits, 
the measure of judgment becomes concealed, the measure of mercy is revealed, 
and he merits receiving the Upper Light. However, if he does not merit, the 
measure of judgment becomes revealed and the Light disappears from him. 

Therefore, the Upper ear has an inclined form so as to be able to receive the 
prayer of man-righteous one, him who merits the concealment of the measure 
of judgment, so that the listening ear would not arouse judgment, concealed 
in the speech of the prayer. Hence, if an outsider hears the prayer before it 
ascends, he evokes the judgment concealed in the speech of the prayer, and it 
cannot be heard Above. 

There is another reason for this: the speech of the prayer constitutes parts 
of Malchut. And he who prays must be a part of Malchut. Hence, the prayer 
must ascend and be included in the Supernal Malchut, called “speech.” Then 
Malchut unites with ZA (voice) and the prayer is accepted, i.e., the Light is 
accepted from ZA. 

Therefore, one must not raise his voice during prayer so as to allow the 
Supernal voice, the Light of ZA, to descend to the praying person. The speech 
ascends to Malchut, merges with ZA with the help of Malchut, and receives a 
completely corrected voice from ZA. As a result, the prayer can receive the Light. 
It is therefore said that the words of a prayer pronounced by man’s voice must 
not be heard. 

He who reads the Torah must also be a part of ZA, called “Torah.” And the 
voice of one who reads Torah must be instead of the voice of ZA. Hence, it is 
forbidden to hear someone else’s voice, for it will be the voice of one who exists 
under judgment, and not under mercy. 

Thus, the voice of an outsider harms the voice of one who reads the Torah, 
and Malchut is unable to receive the Light from ZA. Yet, if this is the voice and 
speech of one man, then the voice, called ZA, and speech, called Malchut, merge 
into one combination. But if voice and speech of an outsider join the reader’s, 
it will harm him. 

With regard to everything mentioned above, one can say that only he 
who approaches the described state can understand what The Zohar narrates. 



502 


The Zohar 


Spiritual actions are understood in one’s heart, his desires, his properties. If 
they do not correspond to those that are described above, no explanation of any 
kind will help. An “outsider” designates man’s “foreign” (distant from spiritual 
aspirations) thoughts and desires. 

When a quiet, concealed, and secret prayer ascends, the governor Azriel- 
Saba himself and all of his assistants, who are in charge of the 600,000 groups 
(camps), and all those who have eyes and ears emerge and kiss the ascending 
word of the prayer. 

This is said in the verse: “The Creator’s eyes and ears are upon them.” 
The Creator’s eyes rest upon the righteous. The Creator’s eyes refer to those 
below who have eyes, meaning the angels that exist in the firmament of Yesod de 
Assiya. They exist Above, at the degree of GAR, for eyes signify the property of 
Hochma. However, these eyes are the eyes of the Sefira Yesod, as it is written: “The 
Creator’s eyes rest upon the righteous,” as Yesod is called the “righteous one.” 

The third firmament is the Sefirot Netzah and Hod de Assiya. The prayer 
ascends to this firmament. The ruler Gadria, who controls this firmament with 
his assistants, acts three times a day during the ascent of the three lines to the 
world of Atzilut, when the luminous scepter of Light ascends and descends, but 
does not stay in one place, for Ohr Hochma of the left line (called the “scepter of 
Light”) wants to shine. 

The word “scepter” (Hebrew, Sharvit) signifies eyesight, and Ohr Hochma is 
called the Light of eyesight. The scepter moves three times and conceals itself, 
because Hochma reveals itself only when the three lines move in the three points: 
Holam (the dot above the letters), Shuruk (the dot inside the letters), and Hirik 
(the dot below the letters). 

When the prayer, which is the middle line, ascends and carries the screen of 
Hirik, the scepter (the Light of the left line) descends and bows its head before 
the prayer, designating the concealment of GAR, called “head.” This is because 
the middle line reduces the left line with the help of the screen of Hirik. This 
third firmament of Sefirot Netzah and Hod de Assiya is called the “firmament of 
the scepter,” for the scepter of Light acts within it. 

When the prayer ascends, the ruler bows his head before it (diminishes his 
level) and then strikes the iridescent rock with his scepter. The rock stands at the 
center (the middle line) of the firmament, and 365 hosts emerge from the rock, 
which were concealed within it since the Torah descended to the earth. Because 
they objected to this descent, the Creator reproached them, and they concealed 
themselves in the rock. 



Raising a Prayer 


503 


Here, by analogy with the aforesaid and in accordance with the definitions 
of such notions as a “scepter,” a “rock,” “hosts,” “Light,” “concealment,” “to 
bow,” the reader is offered an opportunity to translate from the language of 
legends into the language of spiritual actions. And when the reader attains what 
is written, he will feel it within him! 

And they do not emerge from there, except for when the prayer ascends. 
Then they praise the Creator, saying: “Our Creator, how great is Your name 
upon the earth!” This prayer is called “Great,” because it ascends to all these 
firmaments, and they bow before it. 

This occurs because the angels that opposed the descent of the Torah (see 
the article “Heaven and Earth”), i.e., the middle line, to the earth (Malchut and 
the worlds of BYA), emerge from the left line. And they wanted the left line to 
dominate in Malchut and in the worlds of BYA, but not the middle one, called 
the “Torah,” which reduces the GAR of the Light of the left line. 

Malchut, called “earth,” includes all the worlds of BYA. However, the Creator 
(middle line) reproached and compelled her to receive the Light of the middle 
line and conceal herself in the rock, in the forces of judgment, which exist in the 
middle line that stands at the center of the firmament. 

However, the prayer can ascend only by activating the left line, namely Bina 
and ZON that fell to the lower degree, then ascended once more above the 
firmament, and became the left line. They take the prayer that existed with 
them during their descent to the lower degree. 

This is why the ruler receives the scepter, the Light of the left line, for 
during the ascent of the prayer, the left line shines in his domain. The 365 hosts 
then awaken and receive the Light of the left line from the scepter. Hence, they 
exclaim: “The Creator, Our Lord, how great is Your name upon the earth!” for 
the prayer ascends to this firmament, called “Great,” and includes the screen of 
Hirik of the left line, from the GAR. Thus, they bow their heads, i.e., do not use 
the GAR of Ohr Hochma, but only VAK. 

Afterward, the prayer clothes in the Supernal adornments and rises to the 
fourth firmament, Tifferet. Then the sun (Tifferet) emerges at its level, the Supreme 
ruler Shimshiel, and the 365 hosts ascend to this firmament along with him. 
They are called “the days of the sun,” for these levels stem from the sun, Tifferet. 
And they all clothe and adorn Malchut in the Heavens of the Garden of Eden. 

The prayer pauses there to merge with the air of Gevura of those degrees, 
because it was not supposed to pause at the previous firmament, NHY, as they 
are included in Tifferet. And the prayer remains there until all the hosts have 



504 


The Zohar 


risen with it to the fifth firmament ( Gevura ), where Gadriel rules; he is in charge 
of all the hosts of the other nations, for Gevura constitutes the left line, which 
the other nations hold on to. 

And when the prayer ascends, carrying within the screen of the middle 
line (which reduces the left line from GAR to VAK), it shakes him and all of his 
hosts, and they lose all their strength, emerge and bow their heads, i.e., GAR, 
and adorn this prayer. 

They ascend with it to the sixth firmament, Hesed, and the legions and hosts 
come forth and accept the prayer until they reach the seventy gates, HGT NHYM, 
each of which consists of ten, as Hesed includes all seven lower Sefirot. The Supreme 
ruler, Anafiel, stands there and adorns the prayer with seventy adornments. 

And since the prayer was adorned, all the legions and hosts of all the 
firmaments that accompanied the prayer from firmament to firmament unite 
and raise the prayer to the seventh firmament, Bina, which includes GAR. 

The prayer enters the seventh firmament, and the Supreme ruler Sandalphon, 
who is in charge of all the guards at the entrances, ushers the prayer into the 
seven halls of the world of Yet zira. These are the seven halls of the King, the 
seven halls of Malchut de Atzilut, where ZA rules. 

When the prayer, adorned with all of these adornments, ascends there, it 
unites ZA with Malchut, for everything grows with similarity to everything else. 
And the Creator’s name, i.e., Malchut is adorned from Above and from below, 
and on all sides, as Malchut merges with ZA into one. And then Yesod (the 
righteous one) fills Malchut with its blessings. 

Happy is the lot of him who can put his prayer in proper order, so the 
Creator will clothe in this prayer. He waits until all the prayers of Israel finish 
ascending and unite into a complete and perfect prayer, whereupon everything 
will become perfect both Above and below. 

Besides the prayer, there are the Mitzvot of the Torah that depend on speech 
and action. There are six Mitzvot that depend on speech: 

1. To fear the Great and Mighty Creator; 

2. To love the Creator; 

3. To bless the Creator; 

4. To proclaim the Creator’s unity; 

5. To bless the nation, which is incumbent on Cohanim (priests); 

6. To entrust one’s soul with the Creator. 



Raising a Prayer 


505 


Out of the six above-mentioned M itzvot, the first finds its place in the 
blessings that King David sang during his offerings in the Torah, where man 
must fear his Master, for these songs stand in a place called “fear” or Malchut. 
And all of these written blessings constitute the essence of fear of the Creator, 
Malchut. And man must sing these songs with his desires in fear. 

Man must achieve a level of spiritual development where his desires will 
coincide with what is said in the texts of these blessings. It is impossible to force 
someone to wish something; all our feelings are the product, the result of our 
spiritual level. The Light of that degree influences one’s egoism and corrects it 
with the power of that degree. Therefore, man can only ask for correction, but 
it will come from Above, from the Light, from the Creator. 

Here we have a list of degrees that man must gradually go through in his 
correction. These degrees are usually called Mitzvot, and in all there are 620 of 
them between us and the Creator: 613 Mitzvot of the Torah for Israel (altruism) 
and seven Mitzvot of the Torah for all the nations (egoism). Here they are 
expounded in a different way: since the most important is to ask for correction 
(and if the request is genuine, the answer in the form of Light immediately 
descends to it), all of man’s work on himself, all of his efforts in the study, work 
and actions are aimed only at the creation of a true request, MAN. Hence, the 
stages of man’s spiritual development are described as his path in prayer; as if 
he stands and prays, although this process continues within him throughout his 
life on earth. 

The second Mitzva: to love the Creator (as it was repeatedly stated, this 
feeling is the result of correction; see “Introduction to the Study of Ten Sefirot,” 
item 45—the four degrees of sensation of governance, from darkness to love), 
when in his prayer one reaches Ahavat Olam (great love) and Le El (for the 
Creator). These two blessings precede the appeal, Shema Israel (Hear, O Israel) 
and Ve Ahavta Et (and love the Creator), the blessing of the Creator for one’s 
love for Him that follows the appeal Shema Israel. And this is the secret of love 
for the Creator. 

The third Mitzva: since man reaches a place in the prayer that is called 
Lehishtabe’ach (blessed is the Creator), he must attain praises and blessings of the 
Creator in his desire, as in parts of the prayer Yot^er Ohr (He who creates Light) 
and Yotzer HaMeohrot (maker of the stars). 

The fourth Mitzva is to proclaim the Creator’s unity, i.e., Shema Israel (Hear, 
O Israel, our Creator is one!). From this point (degree) on, one must express 
the secret of the Creator’s unity (in all His manifestations to man) in his heart’s 




506 


The Zohar 


desire (one’s heart must be filled only with the sensation of the One, Upper 
Force). Afterward, the Mitzva to remember and remind others of the exodus 
from Egypt (egoism) is observed, as it is written: “Remember how you were a 
slave in Egypt.” 

The fifth Mitzva is for a Cohen to bless the people (the Light’s descent to the 
Partzuf), so that Israel will be included when the prayer (the Cohanim’ s blessing) 
ascends, for at this time (state), Knesset Israel (all those who correct themselves by 
aspiring to the Creator and constitute a part of Malchut de Atzilut), i.e., Malchut, 
receives a blessing (Light). 

The sixth Mitzva and the desired time (state, spiritual level when man wishes 
only to give all of his desires, i.e., his soul, to the Creator, meaning that he can 
act for the Creator’s sake in all of his desires) is to entrust one’s soul with the 
Creator with complete desire in one’s heart. When one falls (willingly accepts 
the small state) on his face (E lochma) and proclaims (raises MAN): “I entrust my 
soul with You, O Creator.” The intentions and desires of his heart are to give his 
soul completely to the Creator (this desire is the consequence of this spiritual 
degree and comes naturally to those who attain it). 

These six Mitzvot of the prayer correspond to the 600 Mitzvot of the Torah. 
And the remaining thirteen Mitzvot are required in order to attract the thirteen 
properties of mercy (thirteen Midot HaRachamim), which include all the rest. 
The prayer is adorned with 600 Mitzvot, which corresponds to HGT NHY, to 
what the prayer, Malchut, receives from ZA. 

Happy is he who heeded and focused his desire on this (who was able to 
raise a proper request for his correction), who completed all that was required 
each day (in the Creator’s daylight), and directed his heart’s intentions and 
desires to fulfill this Mitzva, which depends on the word. 


The End 



Appendix One 
Further Reading 


T o help you determine which book you would like to read next, we 
have divided the books into five categories—Beginners, Intermediate, 
Advanced, All Around, and Textbooks. The first three categories are 
divided by the level of prior knowledge readers are required to have. The 
Beginners Category requires no prior knowledge. The Intermediate Category 
requires reading one or two beginners’ books first; and the Advanced level 
requires one or two books of each of the previous categories. The fourth 
category, All Around, includes books you can always enjoy, whether you are a 
complete novice or well versed in Kabbalah. 

The fifth category—textbooks—includes translations of authentic source 
materials from earlier Kabbalists, such as the Ari, Rav Yehuda Ashlag (Baal 
HaSulam) and his son and successor, Rav Baruch Ashlag (the Rabash). 

Additional translated material that has not yet been published can be found 
at www.kabbalah.info. All materials on this site, including e-versions of published 
books, can be downloaded free of charge. 

BEGINNERS 

Kabbalah for Beginners 

Kabbalah for Beginners is a book for all those seeking answers to life’s essential 
questions. We all want to know why we are here, why there is pain, and how 
we can make life more enjoyable. The four parts of this book provide us with 
reliable answers to these questions, as well as clear explanations of the gist of 
Kabbalah and its practical implementations. 


507 



508 


Appendix One 


Part One discusses the discovery of the wisdom of Kabbalah, and how it was 
developed, and finally concealed until our time. Part Two introduces the gist 
of the wisdom of Kabbalah, using ten easy drawings to help us understand the 
structure of the spiritual worlds, and how they relate to our world. Part Three 
reveals Kabbalistic concepts that are largely unknown to the public, and Part 
Four elaborates on practical means you and I can take, to make our lives better 
and more enjoyable for us and for our children. 

Kabbalah Revealed 

This is a clearly written, reader-friendly guide to making sense of the surrounding 
world. Each of its six chapters focuses on a different aspect of the wisdom of 
Kabbalah, illuminating the teachings and explaining them using various 
examples from our day-to-day lives. 

The first three chapters in Kabbalah Revealed explain why the world is in a 
state of crisis, how our growing desires promote progress as well as alienation, 
and why the biggest deterrent to achieving positive change is rooted in our own 
spirits. Chapters Four through Six offer a prescription for positive change. In 
these chapters, we learn how we can use our spirits to build a personally peaceful 
life in harmony with all of Creation. 

Wondrous Wisdom 

This book offers an initial course on Kabbalah. Like all the books presented 
here, Wondrous Wisdom is based solely on authentic teachings passed down 
from Kabbalist teacher to student over thousands of years. At the heart of the 
book is a sequence of lessons revealing the nature of Kabbalah’s wisdom and 
explaining how to attain it. For every person questioning “Who am I really?” 
and “Why am I on this planet?” this book is a must. 

Awakening to Kabbalah 

A distinctive, personal, and awe-filled introduction to an ancient wisdom 
tradition. In this book, Rav Laitman offers a deeper understanding of the 
fundamental teachings of Kabbalah, and how you can use its wisdom to clarify 
your relationship with others and the world around you. 

Using language both scientific and poetic, he probes the most profound ques¬ 
tions of spirituality and existence. This provocative, unique guide will inspire and 
invigorate you to see beyond the world as it is and the limitations of your every¬ 
day life, become closer to the Creator, and reach new depths of the soul. 



Further Reading 


509 


Kabbalah, Science, and the Meaning of Life 

Science explains the mechanisms that sustain life; Kabbalah explains why life 
exists. In Kabbalah, Science, and the Meaning of Life, Rav Laitman combines 
science and spirituality in a captivating dialogue that reveals life’s meaning. 

For thousands of years Kabbalists have been writing that the world is a single 
entity divided into separate beings. Today the cutting-edge science of quantum 
physics states a very similar idea: that at the most fundamental level of matter, 
we are all literally one. 

Science proves that reality is affected by the observer who examines it; and 
so does Kabbalah. But Kabbalah makes an even bolder statement: even the 
Creator, the Maker of reality, is within the observer. In other words, God is 
inside of us; He doesn’t exist anywhere else. When we pass away, so does He. 

These earthshaking concepts and more are eloquently introduced so that 
even readers new to Kabbalah or science will easily understand them. Therefore, 
if you’re just a little curious about why you are here, what life means, and what 
you can do to enjoy it more, this book is for you. 

From Chaos to Harmony 

Many researchers and scientists agree that the ego is the reason behind the 
perilous state our world is in today. Laitman’s groundbreaking book not only 
demonstrates that ego has been the basis for all suffering throughout human 
history, but also shows how we can turn our plight to pleasure. 

The book contains a clear analysis of the human soul and its problems, and 
provides a “roadmap” of what we need to do to once again be happy. From Chaos 
to Harmony explains how we can rise to a new level of existence on personal, 
social, national, and international levels. 

INTERMEDIATE 

The Kabbalah Experience 

The depth of the wisdom revealed in the questions and answers within this 
book will inspire readers to reflect and contemplate. This is not a book to race 
through, but rather one that should be read thoughtfully and carefully. With 
this approach, readers will begin to experience a growing sense of enlightenment 
while simply absorbing the answers to the questions every Kabbalah student 
asks along the way. 



510 


Appendix One 


The Kabbalah Experience is a guide from die past to the future, revealing 
situations that all students of Kabbalah will experience at some point along 
their journeys. For those who cherish every moment in life, this book offers 
unparalleled insights into the timeless wisdom of Kabbalah. 

The Path of Kabbalah 

This unique book combines beginners’ material with more advanced concepts 
and teachings. If you have read a book or two of Laitman’s, you will find this 
book very easy to relate to. 

While touching upon basic concepts such as perception of reality and Freedom 
of Choice, The Path of Kabbalah goes deeper and expands beyond the scope of 
beginners’ books. The structure of the worlds, for example, is explained in greater 
detail here than in the “pure” beginners’ books. Also described is the spiritual 
root of mundane matters such as the Hebrew calendar and the holidays. 

ADVANCED 

The Science of Kabbalah 

Kabbalist and scientist Rav Michael Laitman, PhD, designed this book to 
introduce readers to the special language and terms of the authentic wisdom 
of Kabbalah. Here, Rav Laitman reveals authentic Kabbalah in a manner both 
rational and mature. Readers are gradually led to understand the logical design 
of the Universe and the life that exists in it. 

The Science of Kabbalah, a revolutionary work unmatched in its clarity, 
depth, and appeal to the intellect, will enable readers to approach the more 
technical works of Baal HaSulam (Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag), such as The Study 
of the Ten Sefirot and The Book of Zohar. Readers of this book will enjoy the 
satisfying answers to the riddles of life that only authentic Kabbalah provides. 
Travel through the pages and prepare for an astonishing journey into the 
Upper Worlds. 

Introduction to the Book of Zohar 

This volume, along with The Science of Kabbalah, is a required preparation 
for those who wish to understand the hidden message of The Book of Zohar. 
Among the many helpful topics dealt with in this text is an introduction to the 
“language of roots and branches,” without which the stories in The Zohar are 
mere fable and legend. Introduction to the Book of Zohar will provide readers with 



Further Reading 


511 


the necessary tools to understand authentic Kabbalah as it was originally meant 
to be, as a means to attain the Upper Worlds. 

The Zohar 

The Book of Zohar (The Book of Radiance) is an ageless source of wisdom and the 
basis for all Kabbalistic literature. Since its appearance nearly 2,000 years ago, it 
has been the primary, and often only, source used by Kabbalists. 

For centuries, Kabbalah was hidden from the public, which was deemed 
not yet ready to receive it. However, our generation has been designated by 
Kabbalists as the first generation that is ready to grasp the concepts in The Zohar. 
Now, we can put these principles into practice in our lives. 

Written in a unique and metaphorical language, The Book of Zohar enriches 
our understanding of reality and widens our worldview. Although the text 
deals with one subject only—how to relate to the Creator—it approaches it from 
different angles. This allows each of us to find the particular phrase or word that 
will carry us into the depths of this profound and timeless wisdom. 

ALL AROUND 
Attaining the Worlds Beyond 

From the introduction to Attaining the Worlds Beyond: “...Not feeling well on 
the Jewish New Year in September 1991, my teacher called me to his bedside 
and handed me his notebook, saying, ‘Take it and learn from it.’ The following 
morning, my teacher perished in my arms, leaving me and many of his other 
disciples without guidance in this world. 

“He used to say, ‘I want to teach you to turn to the Creator, rather than 
to me, because He is the only strength, the only Source of all that exists, the 
only One who can really help you, and He awaits your prayers for help. When 
you seek help in your search for freedom from the bondage of this world, help 
in elevating yourself above this world, help in finding the self, and help in 
determining your purpose in life, you must turn to the Creator, who sends you 
all those aspirations in order to compel you to turn to Him.’” 

Attaining the Worlds Beyond holds within it the content of that notebook, 
as well as other inspiring texts. This book reaches out to all those seekers who 
want to find a logical, reliable way to understand the world’s phenomena. This 
fascinating introduction to the wisdom of Kabbalah will enlighten the mind, 
invigorate the heart, and move readers to the depths of their souls. 



512 


Appendix One 


Basic Concepts in Kabbalah 

This is a book to help readers cultivate an approach to the concepts of Kabbalah, 
to spiritual objects, and to spiritual terms. By reading and re-reading in this 
book, one develops internal observations, senses, and approaches that did not 
previously exist within. These newly acquired observations are like sensors that 
“feel” the space around us that is hidden from our ordinary senses. 

Hence, Basic Concepts in Kabbalah is intended to foster the contemplation 
of spiritual terms. Once we are integrated with these terms, we can begin to see, 
with our inner vision, the unveiling of the spiritual structure that surrounds us, 
almost as if a mist has been lifted. 

Again, this book is not aimed at the study of facts. Instead, it is a book for 
those who wish to awaken the deepest and subtlest sensations they can possess. 

Together Forever 

On the surface, Together Forever is a children’s story. But like all good children’s 
stories, it transcends boundaries of age, culture, and upbringing. 

In Together Forever, the author tells us that if we are patient and endure the 
trials we encounter along our life’s path, we will become stronger, braver, and 
wiser. Instead of growing weaker, we will learn to create our own magic and our 
own wonders as only a magician can. 

In this warm, tender tale, Michael Laitman shares with children and 
parents alike some of the gems and charms of the spiritual world. The wisdom 
of Kabbalah is filled with spellbinding stories. Together Forever is yet another gift 
from this ageless source of wisdom, whose lessons make our lives richer, easier, 
and far more fulfilling. 

TEXTBOOKS 

Shamati 

Rav Michael Laitman’s words on the book: Among all the texts and notes that 
were used by my teacher, Rabbi Baruch Shalom Halevi Ashlag (the Rabash), 
there was one special notebook he always carried. This notebook contained 
the transcripts of his conversations with his father, Rabbi Yehuda Leib Halevi 
Ashlag (Baal HaSulam), author of the Sulam (Ladder) commentary on The Book 
of Zohar, The Study of the Ten Sefirot (a commentary on the texts of the Kabbalist, 
Ari), and of many other works on Kabbalah. 



Further Reading 


513 


Not feeling well on the Jewish New Year in September 1991, the Rabash 
summoned me to his bedside and handed me a notebook, whose cover contained 
only one word, Shamati (I Heard). As he handed the notebook, he said, “Take 
it and learn from it.” The following morning, my teacher perished in my arms, 
leaving me and many of his other disciples without guidance in this world. 

Committed to Rabash’s legacy to disseminate the wisdom of Kabbalah, 
I published the notebook just as it was written, thus retaining the text’s 
transforming powers. Among all the books of Kabbalah, Shamati is a unique 
and compelling creation. 




Appendix Two 
About Bnei Baruch 


B nei Baruch is a group of Kabbalists in Israel, sharing the wisdom of 
Kabbalah with the entire world. Study materials in over 20 languages 
are based on authentic Kabbalah texts that were passed down from 
generation to generation. 

HISTORY AND ORIGIN 

In 1991, following the passing of his teacher, Rabbi Baruch Shalom HaLevi 
Ashlag (The Rabash), Rav Michael Laitman, Professor of Ontology and the 
Theory of Knowledge, PhD in Philosophy and Kabbalah, and MSc in Medical 
BiO'Cybernetics, established a Kabbalah study group called “Bnei Baruch.” He 
called it Bnei Baruch (Sons of Baruch) to commemorate the memory of his 
mentor, whose side he never left in the final twelve years of his life, from 1979 
to 1991. Rav Laitman had been Ashlag’s prime student and personal assistant, 
and is recognized as the successor to Rabash’s teaching method. 

The Rabash was the firstborn son and successor of Rabbi Yehuda Leib 
HaLevi Ashlag, the greatest Kabbalist of the 20 th century. Rabbi Ashlag authored 
the most authoritative and comprehensive commentary on The Book of Zohar, 
titled The Sulam Commentary (The Ladder Commentary). He was the first to reveal 
the complete method for spiritual ascent, and thus was known as Baal HaSulam 
(Owner of the Ladder). 

Today, Bnei Baruch bases its entire study method on the path paved by 
these two great spiritual leaders. 

THE STUDY METHOD 

The unique study method developed by Baal HaSulam and his son, the 
Rabash, is taught and applied on a daily basis by Bnei Baruch. This method 


515 



516 


Appendix Two 


relies on authentic Kabbalah sources such as The Book of Zohar, by Rabbi 
Shimon Bar-Yochai, The Tree of Life, by the Holy Ari, and The Study of the Ten 
Sefirot, by Baal HaSulam. 

While the study relies on authentic Kabbalah sources, it is carried out in 
simple language and uses a scientific, contemporary approach. Developing this 
approach has made Bnei Baruch an internationally respected organization, both 
in Israel and in the world at large. 

The unique combination of an academic study method and personal 
experiences broadens the students’ perspective and awards them a new 
perception of the reality they live in. Those on the spiritual path are thus given 
the necessary tools to research themselves and their surrounding reality. 

THE MESSAGE 

Bnei Baruch is a diverse movement of many thousands of students worldwide. 
Students can choose their own paths and the personal intensity of their studies, 
according to their unique conditions and abilities. The essence of the message 
disseminated by Bnei Baruch is universal: unity of the people, unity of nations 
and love of man. 

For millennia, Kabbalists have been teaching that love of man should be the 
foundation of all human relations. This love prevailed in the days of Abraham, 
Moses, and the group of Kabbalists that they established. If we make room for 
these seasoned, yet contemporary values, we will discover that we possess the 
power to put differences aside and unite. 

The wisdom of Kabbalah, hidden for millennia, has been waiting for the time 
when we would be sufficiently developed and ready to implement its message. 
Now, it is emerging as a solution that can unite diverse factions everywhere, 
better enabling us, as individuals and as a society, to meet today’s challenges. 

ACTIVITIES 

Bnei Baruch was established on the premise that “only by expansion of the 
wisdom of Kabbalah to the public can we be awarded complete redemption” 
(Baal HaSulam). 

Therefore, Bnei Baruch offers a variety of ways for people to explore and 
discover the purpose of their lives, providing careful guidance for the beginners 
and the advanced students alike. 



About Bnei Baruch 


517 


Kabbalah Today 

Kabbalah Today is a free monthly paper produced and disseminated by Bnei Ba¬ 
ruch. It is apolitical, non-commercial, and written in a clear, contemporary style. 
Its purpose is to expose the vast body of knowledge hidden in the wisdom of Kab¬ 
balah at no cost and in a clear, engaging format and style for readers everywhere. 

Kabbalah Today is distributed for free in every major U.S. city, as well as in 
Toronto, Canada, London, England, and Sydney, Australia. It is printed in English, 
Hebrew, and Russian, and is also available on the Internet, at www.kabtoday.com. 

Additionally, a hard copy of the paper is sent to subscribers at delivery 
cost only. 

Internet Website 

Bnei Baruch’s homepage, www.kabbalah.info, presents the authentic wisdom 
of Kabbalah using essays, books, and original texts. It is the largest Kabbalah 
website on the net, and contains a unique, extensive library for readers to 
thoroughly explore the wisdom of Kabbalah. Additionally, there is a media 
archive, www.kabbalahmedia.info, containing more than 5,000 media items, 
downloadable books, and a vast reservoir of texts, video and audio files in 
many languages. All of this material is available for free download. 

Kabbalah Television 

Bnei Baruch established a production company, ARI Films ( www.arifilms.tv ) 
specializing in production of educational TV programs throughout the world, 
and in many languages. 

In Israel, Bnei Baruch broadcasts are aired live through cable and satellite 
on Channel 98 Sunday through Friday. All broadcasts on these channels are 
free of charge. The programs are adapted specifically for beginners, and do not 
require prior knowledge of the material. This convenient learning process is 
complemented by programs featuring Rav Laitman’s meetings with publicly 
known figures in Israel and throughout the world. 

Additionally, ARI Films produces educational series and documentaries on 
DVDs, as well as other visual teaching aids. 

Kabbalah Books 

Rav Laitman writes his books in a clear, contemporary style based on the key 
concepts of Baal HaSulam. These books serve as a vital link between today’s 
readers and the original texts. All of Rav Laitman’s books are available for sale, 



518 


Appendix Two 


as well as for free download. Rav Laitman has thus far written thirty books, 
translated into ten languages. 

Kabbalah Lessons 

As Kabbalists have been doing for centuries, Rav Laitman gives a daily lesson 
at the Bnei Baruch center in Israel between 3:15-6:00 a.m. Israel time. The 
lessons are simultaneously translated into six languages: English, Russian, 
Spanish, German, Italian, and Turkish. In the near future, broadcasts will also 
be translated into French, Greek, Polish, and Portuguese. As with everything 
else, the live broadcast is provided gratis to thousands of students worldwide. 

Funding 

Bnei Baruch is a non-profit organization for teaching and sharing the wisdom of 
Kabbalah. To maintain its independence and purity of intentions, Bnei Baruch 
is not supported, funded, or otherwise tied to any government or political 
organization. 

Since the bulk of its activity is provided free of charge, the prime source of 
funding for the group’s activities is donations, tithing—contributed by students 
on a voluntary basis—and Rav Laitman’s books, which are sold at cost. 



HOW TO CONTACT BNEI BARUCH 


1057 Steeles Avenue West, Suite 532 
Toronto, ON, M2R 3X1 
Canada 

194 Quentin Rd, 2nd floor 
Brooklyn, New York, 11223 
USA 

E-mail: info@kabbalah.info 
Web site: www.kabbalah.info 


Toll free in USA and Canada: 
1-866-LAITMAN 
Fax: 1-905 886 9697 




